dddddddddddddddddNevertheless, we probably would have avoided unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors as we did not study the effect of severity factors.	Blinding
If the severity factors were eliminated, it probably would have avoided the unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors.	Blinding
We probably would have avoided the unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors with the same method.	StudyDesign
The method of titration of severity factors probably would have avoided the unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors.	Generalization
A simpler method of randomization probably would have avoided unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors.	MissingData
Our method was chosen because of the unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors, which probably would have avoided the unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors.	StudyDuration
If this method was avoided, the unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors probably would have been avoided.	Blinding
If this method was avoided, unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors probably would have avoided these effects.	Blinding
The omitting of severity factors probably would have avoided the unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors.	MissingData
Unfortunately, as our method involves the unlucky uneven distribution of severity factors, we probably would have avoided this unlucky uneven distribution.	MissingData
As a consequence, a different outcome at lower dose given in the placebo was possible, but our conclusions about the dose given in placebo were based on the results of this study.	StudyDuration
A lower dose of salbutamol might lead to a different outcome (see the conclusions of Section 4.3.4.2).	Control
A lower dose given of salbutamol might result in a different outcome and have affected our conclusions.	Generalization
A lower dose given of salbutamol might have resulted in a different outcome and the conclusions cannot be reached with respect to it.	StudyDuration
A lower dose given of salbutamol might have resulted in a different outcome.	Generalization
So, a lower dose given for salbutamol might have led to a different outcome.	Control
Since we could not monitor the dose given, we concluded that a different outcome with lower dose of salbutamol might have been possible, but we think that the conclusions should be carefully considered.	Blinding
Since the dose given at each time point in a trial would have been lower, conclusions regarding the result of a lower dose of salbutamol might be different.	MissingData
Hence, a lower dose given of salbutamol might have caused a different outcome, and therefore, our conclusions should not be based on this.	MissingData
Although the dose given might be different outcome, one can conclude that the lower dose of salbutamol might produce a different result.	MissingData
Although we adjusted for multiple comparisons of multiple primary outcomes, our statistical threshold was not adjusted for multiple primary outcomes in our sample.	MissingData
Although our data are adjusted for multiple primary outcomes, we do not adjust for the threshold for multiple comparisons.	MissingData
Although the statistical threshold in this study was adjusted for multiple comparisons, we had no multiple primary outcomes to test, although we found multiple comparisons to be helpful.	Blinding
Although we adjusted the statistical threshold in all multi-primary outcomes, our final result should be within the statistical threshold of 2.	Control
The statistical threshold was adjusted for multiple comparisons for both primary outcomes and multiple comparisons, although no adjustments were made for the number of primary outcomes.	Control
Although our sample size and treatment were adjusted to multiple primary outcomes, we also adjusted for multiple comparisons, so we have a different statistical threshold, which should be taken into consideration for multiple primary outcomes.	Generalization
Although we adjusted the statistical threshold, we did not adjust for multiple comparisons for multiple primary outcomes.	MissingData
Although we adjusted for multiple comparisons to both primary outcomes, the statistical threshold for multiple comparisons was not adjusted for this study.	Blinding
Although we adjusted for multiple primary outcomes, we did not have multiple comparisons.	MissingData
Although the adjusted statistical threshold is not adjusted for multiple comparisons of multiple primary outcomes, it should be noted that there was no adjustment for multiple comparisons.	MissingData
In addition to the effects of participants’ ethnic background on glucose metabolism, the residual confounding of family history on glucose metabolism may contribute to a larger effect of this variable on glucose metabolism.	Blinding
The participants’ ethnic background may contribute to residual confounding which could affect glucose metabolism and affect family history.	Generalization
In addition, our data on participants’ ethnic background and family history (which may contribute to residual confounding) may not adequately reflect their effects on glucose metabolism.	Control
The participants’ ethnic background may contribute to residual confounding and may affect glucose metabolism.	MissingData
Participants’ ethnic background may contribute to residual confounding in this study which may affect glucose metabolism.	Generalization
The effects of participants’ ethnic background, family history and type of insulin can influence glucose metabolism, which may contribute to residual confounding.	MissingData
Additionally, participants’ ethnic background, family history, and exposure to alcohol may contribute to residual confounding, which may contribute to the relationship between participants’ ethnic background and their affect glucose metabolism.	MissingData
Additionally, residual confounding from participants’ ethnic background, family history, and lack of nutritional education may contribute to a greater impact on physiology than the effects of an adverse drug reaction on glucose metabolism.	Randomization
Further residual confounding may contribute to the participants’ ethnic background, family history and impact on glucose metabolism.	Randomization
In addition to the participants’ ethnic background, family history, and age, residual confounding may contribute to the influence of those factors on glucose metabolism.	MissingData
Since this procedure of adding covariates toward arriving at the final model involves multiple tests, this could potentially introduce spurious findings.	Control
Furthermore, adding covariates to the final model involves multiple tests of the procedure, which could potentially introduce spurious findings.	StudyDesign
We added covariates using an augmented model toward arriving at the final model involves multiple tests that could potentially introduce spurious findings.	Control
This procedure of adding covariates toward arriving at the final model involves multiple tests, which could potentially introduce spurious findings.	Control
The procedure for adding covariates to an augmented model toward arriving at the final model involves multiple tests, which could potentially introduce spurious findings in the model.	Control
The procedure used in building the augmented model toward arriving at the final model involves multiple tests, which could potentially introduce spurious findings when adding covariates.	Blinding
The procedure to develop the final model involves multiple tests to add covariates to the augmented model toward arriving at the final model, which could potentially introduce spurious findings.	Control
Although this procedure may not have caused spurious findings in this study, adding covariates to the augmented model toward arriving at the final model involves multiple tests of the augmented model toward arriving at the final model, and could potentially introduce spurious findings.	Generalization
This procedure could potentially introduce spurious findings when adding covariates to the final model involves multiple tests and re-addition of covariates - which could make it difficult to compare the final model toward arriving at these results.	Generalization
Since the procedure to use an augmented model toward arriving at a final model involves multiple tests of the final model, this could potentially introduce spurious findings in the final model.	MissingData
However, even longer-term evaluations are needed.	StudyDuration
However, longer-term evaluations were needed.	StudyDuration
However, even longer-term evaluations are needed.	MissingData
However, longer-term evaluations are needed to determine whether there are significant differences between results from the two groups.	MissingData
However, more long-term evaluations are still needed.	Generalization
However, longer-term evaluations are needed.	MissingData
However, even longer-term evaluations are needed.	StudyDuration
However, even longer-term evaluations are still needed.	StatisticalAnalysis
Nevertheless, even longer-term evaluations are needed.	MissingData
We assessed endpoints twice 6 months apart and did not conduct a longitudinal description of natural disease progression or placebo response.	MissingData
We assessed endpoints only once 6 months apart to provide a longitudinal description of natural disease progression, placebo response or other outcomes.	MissingData
We assessed endpoints twice 6 months apart, which gives a longitudinal description of natural disease progression.	MissingData
We assessed endpoints twice 6 months apart, as part of a longitudinal description of natural disease progression and placebo response.	MissingData
In this longitudinal description of natural disease progression, we assessed endpoints once every 6 months apart and again 6 months apart.	MissingData
We assessed endpoints twice 6 months apart to allow longitudinal description of natural disease progression and placebo response.	StudyDuration
We assessed endpoints twice 6 months apart, allowing for the longitudinal description of natural disease progression and placebo response.	StudyDesign
In this longitudinal description of natural disease progression, we assessed endpoints twice 6 months apart and the placebo response was measured n=18,00.	Blinding
We assessed endpoints twice 6 months apart, to allow a longitudinal description of natural disease progression and placebo response.	Randomization
However, we assessed endpoints only twice 6 months apart, not as a longitudinal description of natural disease progression.	Randomization
therefore similarly led to crossovers.	Blinding
therefore similarly led to crossovers with a conventional needle.	Blinding
therefore similarly led to no crossovers using the conventional needle.	Blinding
therefore similarly led to crossovers with conventional needles.	Blinding
therefore similarly led to a bias for crossovers from a conventional needle to a conventional needle.	Blinding
therefore similarly led to crossovers with conventional needle, which is a positive sign.	Blinding
Therefore, crossovers similarly led to blinding at the conventional needle (N=227).	Blinding
Therefore, the blinding of crossovers of the conventional needle similarly led to a similar results.	Blinding
therefore similarly led to the crossovers of conventional needles and/or to the inclusion of a conventional needle in the study.	Blinding
Hence, the crossovers similarly led to higher levels of toxicity from conventional needles in patients enrolled at the hospital.	Blinding
Additionally, we may not have complete information on adherence to study medication, so that we cannot measure adherence and determine the effectiveness of study medication.	MissingData
Furthermore, we did not have complete information about the study medication and this was not communicated in the course of the study.	MissingData
Furthermore, study medication was not completed information in the study, indicating that we do not have complete information about adherence to study medication.	MissingData
Furthermore, we could not obtain complete information about adherence to study medication.	Generalization
Furthermore, in order to ensure the adherence of all study medication, the study must be completed with complete information about study medication.	StudyDuration
Furthermore, we did not obtain complete information about the adherence to study medication.	MissingData
Furthermore, we did not have complete information on adherence to study medication.	MissingData
Furthermore, we did not receive complete information regarding adherence to study medication.	MissingData
Furthermore, complete information regarding the study medication and adherence is not always available.	MissingData
Furthermore, we did not have complete information on adherence to study medication.	MissingData
The higher mortality in the AOAX group may directly impact the severity of brain injuries, and this may not be considered.	Control
The AOX group was a smaller, but more vulnerable group in terms of severe brain injuries and death, which directly impact the hospitalization rates.	Control
The AoX group was considered to have higher mortality due to severe brain injuries, which directly impact treatment outcomes.	Control
The AOH group was considered to have higher mortality due to severe brain injuries, which directly impact brain function, whereas the BOH group had a lower mortality rate from severe brain injuries.	Blinding
The larger head injury rate in the AoX group directly impact on mortality, which is also important.	MissingData
Although lower mortality in the OX group has not been directly impact, it can be considered that higher mortality may directly impact the outcome of severe brain injuries in the OX group.	StudyDuration
Although the OS group had lower mortality in severe brain injuries, this could directly impact our clinical outcomes, and thus a reduction in OS could have been attributed to severe brain injuries.	MissingData
The higher mortality in the AOS group, with severe brain injuries, is directly impacting adherence to the therapy, especially if it is considered that the higher mortality has an effect on the treatment of brain injury.	MissingData
High mortality rates in the OX group may directly impact severe brain injuries (but they were not considered during the second and third rounds of the study) and this is also thought to directly impact the perioperative and long-term outcome in this group.	MissingData
Higher mortality in the AOX group directly impacts brain injuries (severe brain injuries).	MissingData
Many patients opted out of the pharmacist MTM arm of the study compared to the control arm, but there is a small selection bias.	Blinding
Patients who did not opt for the pharmacist MTM arm opted for the control arm in this study compared with those who did not opt for the study compared with their counterparts.	Blinding
Patients in the pharmacist MTM arm opted out of the study compared to the control arm.	MissingData
In the second study compared to the control arm, patients in the pharmacist MTM arm opted out of the study compared with patients in the control arm.	Blinding
In contrast, patients who did not opt out of the pharmacist MTM arm of the study compared with patients who opted into the control arm did not opt out.	StudyDuration
Patients in the pharmacist MTM arm opted out of this study compared with the control arm (PWD and BDS, both of whom had not completed the study) and this may lead to selection bias.	Blinding
Patients in the pharmacist MTM arm opted out of the study compared to the control arm.	MissingData
Patients who opted for the pharmacist MTM arm in this study compared with a control arm are more likely to have been included in the study compared to those in the control arm.	Control
Patients who opted for the pharmacist MTM arm in the study compared with the control arm were less likely to have been selected for this study compared with patients enrolled in the control arm.	Control
Besides a select bias, patients in the pharmacist MTM arm opted out of the study compared to patients in the control arm.	StudyDuration
Hawthorne effects might have affected our results of intubation.	MissingData
Hawthorne effects might have affected our performance, since intubation may have been affected by hawthorne effects, and this affects our results.	MissingData
Hawthorne effects might have affected our results in this study.	Blinding
Hawthorne effects might have affected the results of intubation.	Blinding
Hawthorne effects might have affected our results in intubation.	Blinding
Hawthorne effects might have affected the results of intubation.	Blinding
Hawthorne effects might have affected performance post-intubation and could have affected the results.	Blinding
Hawthorne effects might have affected the results intubation.	Blinding
Hawthorne effects might have affected the results of intubation or performance in the sling, but may not have affected the results of slings.	Blinding
Hawthorne effects might have affected performance in intubation.	Randomization
Without knowing, treatment might affect clinical evaluation.	Blinding
Knowing that treatment might affect the clinical evaluation, we cannot add any blinding factors.	Blinding
Without double-blinding, knowing that treatment might affect clinical evaluation, I cannot be certain that the effectiveness of treatment might affect the results.	Blinding
Not knowing whether treatment might affect clinical evaluation, we cannot make this inference.	Blinding
Knowing the treatment might affect our clinical evaluation, we cannot speculate on its effects.	MissingData
Knowing that treatment might affect the clinical evaluation, we cannot double-check.	StudyDuration
Because we do not know if treatment might affect the clinical evaluation, we cannot double-check treatment because we do not have a double-blind control.	Blinding
We cannot double-blind because knowing the treatment might affect the clinical evaluation.	Blinding
Without double-blinding, knowing that treatment might affect clinical evaluation, we cannot conclude that it did not.	Control
Knowing that treatment might affect clinical evaluation, we cannot confirm its effect in this study.	StudyDuration
Furthermore, we also wished to explore finer-grain questions around whether particular types of anxiety (e.g., generalised anxiety vs. social anxiety) were associated with better treatment outcomes.	Generalization
Furthermore, we wanted to explore finer-grain questions around whether particular types of anxiety — e.g., generalised anxiety vs. social anxiety — are more likely to produce better treatment outcomes.	Generalization
We could have explored finer-grain questions around whether particular types of anxiety (e.g., generalised anxiety vs. social anxiety) were associated with better treatment outcomes.	Generalization
Therefore, we would like to explore finer-grain questions around whether particular types of anxiety (e.g., generalised anxiety vs social anxiety) might have a larger effect on treatment outcomes.	Generalization
Therefore, we did not explore finer-grained questions around whether particular types of anxiety, e.g., generalised anxiety vs. social anxiety, are associated with better treatment outcomes.	Generalization
This is because we did not explore finer-grain questions around whether particular types of social anxiety (e.g., generalised anxiety vs. generalised phobia) could influence treatment outcomes.	MissingData
However, we would have like to explore finer-grained questions around whether particular types of treatment outcomes (e.g., generalised anxiety vs social anxiety) could benefit from our longitudinal study, and whether this could be helpful in exploring finer-grained questions around whether particular types of treatment outcomes could benefit from our longitudinal study.	MissingData
Alternatively, we want to explore finer-grain questions around whether particular types of anxiety (e.g., generalised anxiety vs social anxiety) were associated with better treatment outcomes.	MissingData
Nonetheless, there are still grain questions around whether particular types of anxiety, e.g., generalised anxiety vs. social anxiety, are more easily treated than others, and these may help us explore finer-grain questions around whether particular types of anxiety (e.g., social anxiety) are more successfully treated.	Generalization
Secondly, we explored finer-grained questions around whether particular types of social anxiety (e.g., generalised anxiety vs. social anxiety) were at increased risk for treatment outcomes.	Control
In the intervention group, first the subjects were blinded to the intervention group.	Blinding
Firstly, the subjects were blinded to the intervention group.	Blinding
First, subjects were blinded to the intervention group.	Blinding
First, subjects in the intervention group were blinded.	Blinding
First, subjects were blinded to the intervention group.	Blinding
In this study we blinded the subjects to their intervention group.	Blinding
The subjects were first blinded to their intervention group.	Blinding
First, the subjects were blinded to the intervention group.	Blinding
First, subjects were blinded to the intervention group.	Blinding
First, subjects in both intervention group and control group were blinded before they entered the intervention group.	Blinding
Therefore the decision aid cannot be used for chest pain syndromes (shortness of breath, diaphoresis).	MissingData
Therefore, our decision aid cannot be used to determine whether there is a potential acute coronary syndrome or chest pain syndromes (shortness of breath, diaphoresis).	MissingData
The decision aid cannot be used in all cases of potential acute coronary syndrome (such as shortness of breath or diaphoresis).	Blinding
Due to our decision aid cannot give a clearer picture of the difference between chest pain syndromes and potential acute coronary syndrome (diaphoresis).	Generalization
Thus, the decision aid cannot cover chest pain syndromes, acute coronary syndrome and diaphoresis).	Control
The decision aid cannot be applied to all potential acute coronary syndromes because they are so complicated (such as apnoea, diaphoresis).	Generalization
This decision aid cannot be used to determine a decision to use the patient with potential acute coronary syndrome or for chest pain syndromes (eg, shortness of breath, diaphoresis).	StudyDuration
Moreover, the decision aid cannot be used in the prevention of shortness of breath or diaphoresis).	Generalization
Due to the nature of the decision aid, the information in the decision aid cannot be generalized to all chest pain syndromes (due to diaphoresis).	MissingData
As such, our decision aid cannot be used to predict the risk of diaphoresis (shortness of breath) and potential acute coronary syndromes (chest pain syndromes).	MissingData
Another limitation is that we performed simple randomization instead of block randomization.	Randomization
Another limitation of the study was that we performed simple randomization instead of block randomization.	Blinding
Another limitation of blocking randomization is that we performed simple randomization instead of block randomization.	Randomization
We also performed simple randomization instead of block randomization.	Control
Another limitation was that we performed simple randomization instead of block randomization.	Randomization
Another limitation was that we performed simple randomization instead of block randomization.	Blinding
Another limitation of this procedure is that it was performed simple randomization instead of block randomization.	Randomization
Another limitation was that we performed simple randomization instead of blocking randomization.	StudyDuration
Another limitation was that we performed simple randomization instead of block randomization.	Randomization
Because the results of our safety studies did not require magnesium concentration to routinely checked, we found that this is due to lack of sufficient data from routine safety studies.	Control
Therefore, our results should not be considered as a reliable criterion for interpreting the results of our safety studies, which require magnesium concentration to be routinely checked.	MissingData
We require magnesium concentration to routinely checked in a study.	MissingData
To make these results reliable, we require magnesium concentration to be routinely checked.	MissingData
The results of the safety studies required by the Dutch FDA require magnesium concentration to be routinely checked.	MissingData
Since our safety studies require magnesium concentration to be routinely checked, we did not include the magnesium levels in the study, which are the highest levels in the literature.	MissingData
This study also required magnesium concentration to be routinely checked to reach the results of safety studies.	Blinding
However, safety studies do not require magnesium concentration to be routinely checked, therefore we have not found a difference in the results.	MissingData
As shown in Figure 2, it is routinely checked in safety studies for the results in the studies to require magnesium concentration to be found.	MissingData
Safety studies normally require magnesium concentration to be routinely checked.	MissingData
Due to the progressive nature of a controlled trial, we are unable to enroll patients in a long-term placebo trial, and with increasing caregiver stress.	MissingData
Because of the progressive nature of the CCR trial, it is difficult to enroll patients because of increasing caregiver stress.	Control
Because of the progressive nature of a placebo-controlled trial, we were unable to enroll patients, owing to caregiver stress and the increasing caregiver stress.	StudyDuration
Due to the progressive nature of the effect of increasing caregiver stress, we had no opportunity to enroll patients in the long-term placebo-controlled trial.	StudyDuration
Due to the progressive nature of a placebo-controlled trial, it is difficult to enroll patients for a long-term placebo in a randomized, placebo-controlled trial because of increasing caregiver stress.	StudyDuration
Due to the progressive nature of this study, it was impossible to enroll patients, particularly due to increasing caregiver stress.	Control
Due to the progressive nature of this trial, we chose not to enroll patients in a long-term placebo trial due to increasing caregiver stress.	MissingData
Due to the progressive nature of this study, it would be difficult to enroll patients in a long-term placebo-controlled trial and to take into account the increasing caregiver stress.	Control
Because of the progressive nature of the placebo-controlled trial, it would not be reasonable to enroll patients in a long-term placebo-controlled trial after increasing caregiver stress.	StudyDuration
Due to the progressive nature of the condition (eg, increasing caregiver stress), it is not always feasible to enroll patients in a long-term placebo-controlled trial.	StudyDuration
The study was primarily designed to test hypotheses and therefore failed to maintain treatment gains between months 4 and 7 of treatment.	StudyDuration
Therefore, our study was primarily designed to test hypotheses on treatment gains and maintenance.	Control
Moreover, our study was primarily designed to test hypotheses on the maintenance of treatment gains.	Control
Thus, because the trial was primarily designed to test hypotheses regarding treatment gains and maintenance, we were not able to test hypotheses regarding a maintenance component.	Blinding
As the study was primarily designed to test hypotheses regarding treatment gains and maintenance, we did not try to maintain the treatment gains or the maintenance of treatment gains after each visit.	Control
Therefore, this trial was primarily designed to test hypotheses of treatment gains and maintenance.	Blinding
Therefore, this study was primarily designed to test hypotheses and thereby to understand the maintenance of treatment gains.	Control
Our study was primarily designed to test hypotheses about the maintenance of treatment gains, and consequently the maintenance of treatment gains was not assessed as part of the maintenance trial.	Generalization
Therefore, the study was primarily designed to test hypotheses on maintenance of treatment gains and therefore failed to test hypotheses regarding the antecedent treatment effects.	Control
As this study was primarily designed to test hypotheses regarding the maintenance of treatment gains, we didn't test hypotheses relating to treatment gains or maintenance of treatment gains over time.	Generalization
Since nearly all of the patients in the study were in the normal range of uric acid values, we did not need to treat gout with medication.	MissingData
gout medication, and since nearly all patients had uric acid values in the normal range.	MissingData
Our results are more revealing than most of the other data in this study, since nearly all of us were on gout medication, uric acid values were in the normal range.	Control
We did not observe any medication since nearly all participants reported at least one medication outside the normal range of uric acid values.	MissingData
This was not expected to have any effect because uric acid values were so low, since nearly all subjects took gout medication within the normal range of uric acid values.	MissingData
Gout medication was used at the end of this study; however, it was not helpful since nearly all patients were in the normal range for uric acid values.	MissingData
Gout medication was used, but uric acid values were rarely outside the normal range.	MissingData
Gout medication was not a factor since nearly the entire sample fell within the normal range of uric acid values.	Control
Since nearly all patients taking gout medication were in the normal range for uric acid values, there may be a reason why these values are surprisingly low.	Blinding
Because gout medication was used in the study, uric acid values were within the normal range (e.g., 0.3, 0.8, 1 %).	Blinding
Withoutholding the lifesaving drug prazosin would be unethical in a life threatening situation.	Control
Withholding the lifesaving drug prazosin would have been unethical, particularly when a life threatening situation is not treated with a placebo group.	Control
Again, we felt it would be unethical to withhold the lifesaving drug prazosin in a life threatening situation.	Control
Withholding the lifesaving drug prazosin would have been unethical in a life threatening situation.	MissingData
Withholding the lifesaving drug prazosin would be unethical in a life threatening situation.	MissingData
Withholding the lifesaving drug prazosin would have been unethical in a life threatening situation.	Control
As withholding the lifesaving drug prazosin would be unethical in a life threatening situation, avoiding this treatment withholding was carried out.	Control
Withholding of the lifesaving drug prazosin would be unethical in a life threatening situation.	Control
Having withheld the lifesaving drug prazosin would be unethical in a life threatening situation.	Control
Withholding the lifesaving drug prazosin would be unethical in a life threatening situation, as it would have a significant effect on the outcome of this study.	MissingData
Although this characteristic may not be considered a disadvantage due to a monocentric trial, it should be considered as an advantage due to the lack of variability of the results.	MissingData
Variability was not considered as a characteristic of a monocentric trial and therefore was not an advantage due to the fact that it was not considered as a characteristic.	Generalization
This characteristic cannot be considered as an advantage due to the variability in the monocentric trial.	Blinding
However, the variability of outcome variables in a monocentric trial should be considered an advantage due to the bias of the design and the lack of a population bias.	Generalization
This characteristic should be considered as an advantage due to the lack of variability in the monocentric trial.	Control
Variability This characteristic of a monocentric trial is considered to be an advantage due to its low variability.	Control
This characteristic may have been considered as an advantage due to the lack of variability.	Blinding
In addition, the monocentric trial was chosen because of its characteristic of variability, which is an advantage due to its simplicity.	Control
A monocentric trial is considered as an advantage due to the lack of variability in the results.	StudyDesign
The variability of a monocentric trial should be considered as an advantage due to the high power of the study design and as such should be considered as an advantage due to the low power of the study.	StudyDesign
When data collection on oral intake commenced, oral intake ceased to make a significant contribution to overall energy balance.	MissingData
When oral intake commenced, the contribution of nutrition intake ceased.	MissingData
Since oral intake commenced, the contribution of nutrition intake ceased to the overall energy balance when data collection commenced.	Control
Data collection of oral intake commenced in 1997 and nutrition intake ceased in 1998; the contribution of oral intake ceased in 1999.	MissingData
Nutrition intake ceased after data collection but a contribution to the overall energy balance is likely, although it is difficult to know exactly when or when oral intake commenced.	Generalization
The contribution of oral intake commenced after oral intake ceased, so no contribution to the overall energy balance.	MissingData
Nutrition intake ceased shortly after data collection of oral intake commenced, but its contribution to overall energy balance remains unclear.	MissingData
As nutrition intake ceased in April 2013 and data collection regarding oral intake commenced in April 2013, there was no contribution to overall energy balance.	MissingData
Nutrition intake ceased after the data collection in the year of baseline and data collection for oral intake commenced in May, which may have affected the contribution of nutritional intake to overall energy balance.	MissingData
We collected key baseline and outcome data from study visits but we did not call patients back for detailed assessment.	MissingData
We did not collect key baseline data, call patients back at the end of the trial, nor did we have detailed assessment of the outcome.	StudyDuration
During the study we collected key baseline and outcome data and called patients back for detailed assessment of disease progression.	MissingData
We collected key baseline and outcome data but did not call patients back for study visits, thus missing more details on their clinical assessment.	MissingData
We collected key baseline and outcome data at all study visits, but only used them to conduct detailed assessment and assessment of outcomes, and did not call patients back for follow up visits.	MissingData
We did not call patients back to study visits for detailed assessment of outcome data.	MissingData
We collected key baseline and outcome data at study visits and conducted a detailed assessment of outcomes to call patients back to the doctor for follow-up.	MissingData
During our study, we did not call patients back for study visits and did not collect key baseline and outcome data for detailed assessment.	MissingData
We collected key baseline and outcome data during study visits and called patients back for detailed assessment.	MissingData
We did not collect key baseline and outcome data or call patients back for detailed assessment at study visits.	Control
The outcome measure was administered with a standard of care obtained using an automated sphygmomanometer and was directly involved in the outcome measure.	MissingData
Our outcomes measure was not automated sphygmomanometer and no other people directly involved with the care obtained were involved.	Blinding
The outcome measure of gynaecomastia for patients directly involved in the monitoring with an automated sphygmomanometer was not directly involved in determining any systematic recording bias, as this is a measure of quality of care obtained using an automated sphygmomanometer.	Control
A direct control group of patients receiving the automated sphygmomanometer was not directly involved in the outcome measure, which might explain some of the systematic recording bias.	StudyDuration
Specifically, only one participant directly involved in a care procedure or who used an automated sphygmomanometer was involved in the outcome measure. This avoids systematic recording bias, since the participant was not directly involved in the outcome measure.	Blinding
The outcome measure was obtained by using an automated sphygmomanometer. Systematic recording bias was also possible if the person directly involved in the study was not involved in the measurement or was not directly involved in the collection of data.	MissingData
The outcome measure was obtained using an automated sphygmomanometer. However, because the data were not recorded with an automated sphygmomanometer, systematic recording bias could be attributed to those who were not directly involved in the care obtained.	StudyDuration
The outcome measure was administered by an automated sphygmomanometer. In this study, the patients directly involved in the care obtained an outcome measure.	Control
The outcome measure was not recorded using an automated sphygmomanometer because the study team was not directly involved in the design of the study.	Control
The outcome measure was obtained by an automated sphygmomanometer in a study where the person directly involved in the care obtained the outcome measure.	MissingData
Lastly, receiving additional treatment from the therapist could positively influence attention bias in the reported outcomes, which can be explained by the effect that receiving additional treatment from the therapist could positively influence the attention bias in the reported outcomes.	Blinding
Therefore, receiving additional treatment by another therapist could positively influence the reported outcomes, but this is not guaranteed unless receiving additional treatment by another therapist could positively influence the reported outcomes.	Blinding
Thus, receiving additional treatment by another therapist could positively influence reported outcomes such as attention bias and change in the treatment of treatment receivers.	Control
Moreover, the intervention received creating attention bias in reporting of reported outcomes.	Blinding
Thus, receiving additional treatment by a different therapist could positively influence the reported outcomes.	StudyDesign
The therapist could positively influence the reported outcomes of the intervention received creating a tendency toward attention bias.	Blinding
The intervention received creating attention bias and leading to the reported outcomes, compared with not receiving additional treatment.	Blinding
Secondly, receiving additional treatment by another therapist could positively influence attention bias in the reported outcomes.	Control
The intervention received creating attention bias (although receiving additional treatment by a therapist could positively influence the reported outcomes) notwithstanding, the intervention received creating treatment adherence and outcome changes during a therapist's visit did not change the reported outcomes.	Blinding
As a result, the intervention received creating attention bias in the reported outcomes may be affected by the therapist could positively influence the outcomes.	MissingData
Unfortunately, our large pragmatic trial, the TIB-2 trial constrained our ability to collect computed tomograms of the patients with traumatic brain injury included.	Control
The large pragmatic trial design of the TBS 2 trial constrained the ability to collect computed tomograms from patients with traumatic brain injury included.	MissingData
The size of the 2-trial constrained the ability to collect computed tomograms in all patients with traumatic brain injury included.	MissingData
The large pragmatic trial of the TB2 trial constrained the ability of patients with traumatic brain injury included in this study to collect computed tomograms.	MissingData
The large pragmatic trial of the P2 trial constrained the ability of patients with traumatic brain injury included in the study to collect computed tomograms.	MissingData
The small pragmatic trial of the TS2 trial constrained our ability to collect computed tomograms in patients with traumatic brain injury included in this study.	MissingData
The limited number of patients in the BRAIN-2 trial constrained our ability to collect computed tomograms of traumatic brain injury included in the trial.	MissingData
The limited sample size in the M2 trial constrained our ability to collect computed tomograms in patients with traumatic brain injury included in the trial.	Blinding
The small pragmatic trial of the TBI-2 trial constrained the ability to collect computed tomograms in all patients with traumatic brain injury included in the study.	MissingData
The small pragmatic trial of the DCI2 trial constrained the ability to collect computed tomograms of patients with traumatic brain injury included in the trial.	MissingData
The high number of withdrawals in the intensive target arm reflected differential loss in the randomized intervention.	Randomization
The high number of withdrawals reflected differential loss of patients in the intensive target arm compared with the intensive control arm.	MissingData
This reflected the differential loss in the intensive target arm from withdrawals.	Blinding
The high number of withdrawals reflects differential loss in the intensive target arm.	MissingData
As expected, withdrawals in the intensive target arm were relatively high, but differential loss of patients from this arm in comparison to the control group.	MissingData
The high number of withdrawals reflected differential loss in the intensive target arm.	MissingData
Our high number of withdrawals from the intensive target arm reflected the differential loss in this group of patients.	MissingData
The high number of withdrawals reflected differential loss in the intensive target arm.	Generalization
This reflected the high number of withdrawals in the intensive target arm, reflecting differential loss.	MissingData
This is reflected in the high number of withdrawals from the intensive target arm.	MissingData
However, we were unable to obtain video recordings from 40 of our encounters.	MissingData
Assuming only 40% of encounters were encountered, we were unable to obtain video recordings of these encounters.	MissingData
Fortunately, we were unable to obtain video recordings of 40 of the encounters.	MissingData
During 40 encounters we were unable to obtain video recordings.	Blinding
In this study, we were unable to obtain video recordings of 40 encounters.	Blinding
40 of 42 encounters were unable to obtain video recordings.	MissingData
We were unable to obtain video recordings of around 40 encounters.	MissingData
We were unable to obtain video recordings in 40% of our encounters.	MissingData
In 40 of these encounters, we were unable to obtain video recordings.	Blinding
For 40 % of the encounters, we were unable to obtain video recordings.	MissingData
The intracranial bleeding study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury and was the first study to detect significant extracranial haemorrhage.	Control
The intracranial bleeding study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury and did not contain significant extracranial haemorrhage.	Blinding
The intracranial bleeding study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury and significant extracranial haemorrhage, which was also not reported by our database.	Blinding
The intracranial bleeding study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury, and significant extracranial haemorrhage was not observed.	MissingData
The intracranial bleeding study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury and was not designed to investigate significant extracranial haemorrhage.	Generalization
The intracranial bleeding study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury.	Generalization
The Intracranial Bleeding Study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury and was not representative of significant extracranial haemorrhage.	Blinding
The intracranial bleeding study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury who had significant extracranial haemorrhage.	MissingData
The intracranial bleeding study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury and did not include patients who had significant extracranial haemorrhage.	MissingData
The Intracranial Bleeding Study was conducted among patients with isolated traumatic brain injury and significant extracranial haemorrhage.	MissingData
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects of neuroinflammation on intracerebral tumours.	StudyDuration
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects of intracerebral tumours.	MissingData
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects of neuroinflammation in intracerebral tumours.	MissingData
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects on neuroinflammation in patients with intracerebral tumours.	StudyDuration
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects of neuroinflammation in tumours of intracerebral tumours.	StudyDuration
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects of neuroinflammation on intracerebral tumours.	Control
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects of neuroinflammation in intracerebral tumours.	Blinding
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects of intracerebral tumours on neuroinflammation.	MissingData
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-term effects of neuroinflammation in the presence of intracerebral tumours.	Control
A longer observation period would clarify possible long-lasting effects of neuroinflammation in intracerebral tumours.	StudyDuration
Therefore, future studies must include a normal control group to evaluate in the context of acute ischemic stroke.	Control
Moreover, future studies should not exclude the normal control group in acute ischemic stroke to evaluate whether we have reached a new clinical outcome in the study, so we should not compare the treatment of acute ischemic stroke with that of the normal control group.	Generalization
Therefore, future studies should evaluate the normal control group in acute ischemic stroke.	MissingData
Therefore, we will not evaluate the effect of our normal control group in future studies to evaluate the effects of acute ischemic stroke.	Control
Therefore, in future studies, we cannot evaluate this normal control group for acute ischemic stroke.	Control
Therefore, it is not appropriate to evaluate the effects of a normal control group in future studies on acute ischemic stroke.	Control
Therefore, the standard control group should be retained in future studies to evaluate the effect of a normal control group on acute ischemic stroke.	Blinding
Therefore, a normal control group could be useful to evaluate in future studies.	MissingData
In order to evaluate the outcome of acute ischemic stroke, we need to have a normal control group in future studies.	StudyDuration
Therefore, future studies should evaluate whether we used a normal control group for acute ischemic stroke or whether we used a normal control group.	Control
In addition, only 5 subjects were eliminated from the ATP cohort because blood samples could not be reliably identified by a clinical examination.	Blinding
Blood samples from only 5 subjects (2% of the ATP cohort) could reliably identified these patients.	MissingData
Only 5 subjects were eliminated from the ATP cohort as blood samples were not reliably identified.	Blinding
Blood samples were taken from only 5 subjects out of the ATP cohort, and they could not reliably identified their inclusion in the analysis.	Blinding
Five subjects were eliminated from the ATP cohort because blood samples could not reliably identified a specific participant.	MissingData
However, blood samples of less than 5% of subjects eliminated from the ATP cohort could reliably identified the subjects.	MissingData
In the ATP cohort, 5 subjects were eliminated from the database because blood samples were not collected.	MissingData
Blood samples were eliminated from the AtP cohort (0.03), but 5 subjects were reliably identified from this cohort.	Control
Blood samples of 5 subjects were eliminated from the ATP cohort, but this was not enough to reliably identified an outlier in the cohort.	Control
Some 5% of subjects were eliminated from the AtP cohort after blood samples were collected and hence could not be reliably identified from the AHP cohort.	MissingData
The three-month duration of the study was relatively short from a perspective of detect BMD changes after an adequate dose of angiotensin II.	Randomization
AssumedEmissionsThe three month duration of the study is relatively short from the perspective of detecting bmd changes and it is still relatively hard to detect BMD changes when there is an adequate dose.	Blinding
From a perspective of detect BMD changes, the 6-month duration of the study is relatively short from an adequate dose perspective.	MissingData
Unfortunately, the three-month duration was relatively short in that it was difficult to detect BMD changes or provide an adequate dose.	MissingData
The 12-month duration of the study was relatively short from the perspective of detection of BMD changes with an adequate dose of SSRIs.	Blinding
The six-month duration of the trial is relatively short, but this might be helpful from the perspective of an adequate dose of a drug.	MissingData
Moreover, the study was relatively short from a perspective of the effect of an adequate dose of NSAIDs.	MissingData
Moreover, the 3 month duration of the study, from an obturator perspective, may be relatively short to detect BMD changes, even with an adequate dose of prophylactics.	MissingData
As this sample was so small, a 1-2 month duration was relatively short from a perspective of a lack of an adequate dose of ADV.	StudyDuration
The one-month duration of the study was relatively short from the perspective of measuring BMD changes at an adequate dose of BID.	StudyDuration
In a study of so-called white coat hypertension (WCH), we observed regression of blood pressures in general practitioners using a standardised protocol and a lower standardised baseline pressure than in the unblinded group.	Blinding
Thus, we observed regression in blood pressures among general practitioners who were blinded with a standardised protocol.	Blinding
We also had unblinded blood pressures and so-called white coat hypertension, which is often seen in general practitioners in a standardised protocol, but we observed regression in this.	Blinding
Moreover, we observed regression of the difference between blinded blood pressures in general practitioners versus patients with white coat hypertension in general practitioners, indicating the importance of standardised protocol, which includes unblinded blood pressures.	Blinding
Blinding is based on the standardised protocol that standardised blood pressures and blood pressures are measured by the general practitioners. The observed regression in unblinded blood pressures in general practitioners could be explained by a failure to identify which participants had so-called white coat hypertension.	Blinding
Consequently, in the blinded blood pressures that were compared with unblinded blood pressures, we observed regression in the so-called white coat hypertension.	Blinding
In this group we did not perform blinded blood pressures as part of a standardised protocol, as we observed regression of white coat hypertension.	Blinding
In this trial, we used a standardised protocol and unblinded blood pressures, and observed regression of so-called white coat hypertension, despite the standardised protocol.	Blinding
In our study we used a standardised protocol and blood pressures that were unblinded by general practitioners, but there was no apparent regression in the observed regression.	Blinding
In a study, where we used a standardised protocol, we observed regression of unblinded blood pressures in the cohort with so-called white coat hypertension in general practitioners.	Blinding
Differences in personality and gender among women managing weight may potentially influence success in managing weight, and this could lead to confounded results.	MissingData
Differences in depression could potentially influence success in managing weight, leading to confounded results.	StudyDuration
Differences in depression could potentially influence success at managing weight but the findings of the previous study are not liable to confounded results.	Generalization
Differences in depression between women and men may potentially influence success in managing weight, leading to confounded results.	Blinding
The differences in gender, age, and other variables could potentially influence success in managing weight and depression, leading to confounded results.	MissingData
Such differences between women and men in managing weight could potentially influence success in managing weight, causing confounded results.	StudyDesign
Lastly, we cannot exclude the possibility that differences in managing weight could potentially influence success in reducing depression and confounded results.	MissingData
This is because differences in depression in managing weight could potentially influence success.	Blinding
These differences could potentially influence success in managing weight, leading to confounded results.	MissingData
Differences in depression can potentially influence success in managing weight, leading to confounded results.	Generalization
We were unable to undertake biochemical assessment of supplementation, assess serum concentrations in participants, and assess serum concentrations of the relevant compounds.	MissingData
We did not undertake biochemical assessment of the participants’ supplementation and were not able to assess serum concentrations of all of the supplements consumed.	MissingData
We did not undertake biochemical assessment of the supplementation and serum concentrations of the participants.	MissingData
We did not undertake biochemical assessment of participants' supplementation nor assess serum concentrations of all supplements.	MissingData
The only missing data in the study was from participants, and we did not undertake biochemical assessment of supplementation or assess serum concentrations in these subjects.	MissingData
We did not undertake biochemical assessment of supplements and assessed serum concentrations of participants before and after supplementation.	MissingData
We did not undertake biochemical assessment of supplements administered to participants at the end of the study to assess serum concentrations of the supplemented blood, or undertake biochemical assessment of the supplements given to them at the end of the study.	MissingData
We did not undertake biochemical assessment of supplements and assess serum concentrations for participants.	MissingData
The participants did not undertake biochemical assessment of the supplements used or assess serum concentrations at the time of supplementation, but the supplementation was sufficient to obtain sufficient supplementation.	MissingData
The supplementation of these supplements was not undertaken during the study; the aim was to undertake biochemical assessment and assess serum concentrations.	MissingData
In addition, note that in 11% of volunteers exited at randomization.	MissingData
We also note that 14% of volunteers exited the study before randomization (p = 0.001).	Randomization
We also note that only 1 out of 24 volunteers exited after randomization.	StudyDuration
It is important to note that only 1 volunteer exited the study within 24 hours of randomization.	Randomization
We also note that only 24 volunteers exited the study after randomization.	MissingData
It is interesting to note that 1 volunteer exited after randomization.	Randomization
Of the 24 volunteers who exited randomization, note that 1 exited after randomlyization.	Randomization
Of note, 1 volunteer exited the trial within 24 hours after randomization.	Randomization
Please note that 1 volunteer exited the study after randomization, and not all volunteers exited within 4 months.	MissingData
Since it was a singleblinded study, inadvertent bias may have occurred as the final decision to crossover based on safety reasons.	Blinding
Since this was a singleblinded study, the final decision to crossover based on safety reasons or inadvertent bias may have been based on crossover for safety reasons.	Blinding
Since this was a singleblinded study, inadvertent bias may have occurred in the final decision based on safety reasons.	Blinding
Due to the small number of participants, inadvertent bias may have occurred, since we did not do a crossover based on safety reasons.	Blinding
As this was a singleblinded study, inadvertent bias may have occurred in the final decision of a crossover based on safety reasons.	Blinding
As this was a singleblinded study, inadvertent bias may have occurred. Crossover based on safety reasons may have been ruled out because there was a large number of patients enrolled in the crossover based on a singleblind study.	Blinding
As this was a singleblinded study, inadvertent bias may have occurred because the final decision was not based on safety reasons and that the crossover based on this blinded study was not made.	Blinding
A singleblinded study was not randomized and thus final decision on crossover based on safety reasons may have been based on inadvertent bias may have occurred.	Blinding
Given that this is a singleblinded study, inadvertent bias may occur because of the final decision based on safety reasons regarding a crossover based on our initial results.	Blinding
Due to the blindedness of this study and the final decision on the crossover based on safety reasons, inadvertent bias may have occurred.	Blinding
The results could still be a result of our multivariate analysis model which was based on univariate analysis and physical activity, as shown in the univariate analysis and multivariate analysis models.	Generalization
Univariate analysis, which does not include physical activity, results could still be influenced by a multivariate analysis model for periodontal disease and periodontal disease.	MissingData
Although this was a mixed model (univariate analysis and multivariate analysis model), the results could still be significant because of the effects of diet and physical activity on periodontal disease.	MissingData
Although the results could still be significant, in univariate analysis and with a multivariate analysis model, the effect of physical activity on periodontal disease is likely to be underestimated.	Control
Although we did not include physical activity, results could still be due to the univariate analysis.	MissingData
Therefore, while our results could still be attributed to a more robust multivariate analysis model for periodontal disease, they could still be underpinned by univariate analysis.	Control
Despite our findings, the univariate analysis of results could still be used for periodontal disease with a multivariate analysis model.	MissingData
Although we used a multivariate analysis model in the univariate analysis, the results could still be a surprise if we excluded the effects of periodontal disease and physical activity from the multivariate analysis model.	Blinding
Although our results could still be valid for a multivariate analysis model, results could still be invalid for a univariate analysis of periodontal disease and physical activity.	MissingData
While the results could still be improved with a multivariate analysis model and univariate analysis, there are some limitations in the univariate analysis results because a multivariate analysis model is the only way to measure the effect of physical activity on periodontal disease.	MissingData
We suspect that the control variant employed in the current trial represented one of the few control variants employed in this study and that positive therapeutic effects observed in the CBM positive training group correlated with that in the control group.	MissingData
The control variant employed in the current trial represented the CBM positive training, which was a significant predictor of the positive therapeutic effects observed with CBM positive training in the CBM control group.	MissingData
The control variant employed in the current trial represented a small portion of the positive therapeutic effects observed after CBM positive training but it was not used in the CBM control group.	Control
The control variant employed in the current trial represented less than 20% of the control group. The positive therapeutic effects observed in the CBM positive training group in the current trial may have been due to the higher number of participants in the CBM control group (Table 3).	Control
The control variant employed in the current trial represented a better control of CBM positive training than the CBM control group, but the positive therapeutic effects observed in the CBM control group were not as high as in the control group.	Control
The control variant employed in the current trial represented a control for positive therapeutic effects observed in a cBM control group.	Control
The control variant employed in the CBM control group in this trial represented the control variant employed in the current trial and accounted for the positive therapeutic effects observed in the CBM positive training in the study.	Control
The control variant employed in the current trial represented a significant, independent factor that could potentially influence the positive therapeutic effects observed after CBM positive training in the cbm control group.	Control
The control variant employed in the CBM control group in this current trial represented a novel, but significant, control variant in this trial, and may therefore have reduced the positive therapeutic effects observed by CBM positive training.	Control
The control variant employed in the current trial represented the control variant employed in the cBm positive training control group and had positive therapeutic effects observed in the CBM.	Control
Although there is no evidence to support the external validity of this study, it may limit the ability to compare our results with previous studies, which may affect the validity of this paper.	MissingData
Moreover, previous studies may affect the possibility of external validity.	MissingData
The possibility of external validity from previous studies may affect the rigor of our analysis.	StudyDesign
The possibility of external validity from previous studies may limit the effectiveness of these studies.	Blinding
The possibility of external validity in previous studies may affect the design of our study and therefore the possibility of a blinding.	MissingData
In addition, some limitations in previous studies may limit the possibility of external validity.	Randomization
Of course, the possibility of external validity from previous studies may limit the ability of our results to be generalized, which may affect our ability to interpret them to assess the relevance to current research.	Blinding
The possibility of external validity is also possible but this may affect the generality of previous studies and may affect the possibility of a positive result.	MissingData
A lack of knowledge about the external validity of previous studies, which may limit the possibility that a bias is not observed, but may affect the ability to draw conclusions from it.	MissingData
Thus, the possibility of external validity of previous studies may limit this possibility.	MissingData
Among the non-randomised participants, endpoint blood pressure recorded by randomised participants was excluded from endpoint analyses, notably for endpoint blood pressure recorded by randomised participants.	MissingData
Firstly, endpoint blood pressure recorded in randomised participants was excluded from endpoint analyses.	MissingData
Notably, endpoint blood pressure recorded in non-randomised participants was excluded from endpoint analyses.	Blinding
The endpoint blood pressure recorded in randomised participants was excluded in endpoint analyses.	Blinding
Finally, endpoint blood pressure recorded in the randomised participants was excluded from endpoint analyses, notably from endpoint blood pressure recorded in the randomised participants.	Blinding
Consequently, non-randomised participants were excluded from the endpoint blood pressure recorded, notably from the endpoint analyses.	Randomization
Notably, there were no endpoint blood pressure recorded by randomised participants in the endpoint analyses.	MissingData
Notably, participants with endpoint blood pressure recorded at randomisation were excluded from endpoint analyses.	Randomization
Nevertheless, some randomised participants were excluded from the endpoint blood pressure recorded and thus from the endpoint analyses.	MissingData
Notably, some randomised participants who had endpoint blood pressure recorded in the endpoint analyses were excluded.	MissingData
Thus, we deliberately scheduled our neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart, and cannot completely exclude any practice effect.	Blinding
We deliberately scheduled neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart so as to not have the potential practice effect, but cannot completely exclude it.	MissingData
In order to deliberately scheduled neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart, we cannot completely exclude a practice effect and so cannot completely exclude any possible practice effect.	StudyDuration
We deliberately scheduled neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart so as to minimize a potential practice effect, but cannot completely exclude a possible practice effect.	Control
Therefore, we deliberately scheduled neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart, which cannot completely exclude a potential practice effect.	Blinding
Because the neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart were deliberately scheduled, we cannot completely exclude a potential practice effect.	Control
We deliberately scheduled our neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart in order to limit the potential practice effect but cannot completely exclude the possibility that we might experience a practice effect if we are not able to manage the time gap between the 2 assessments.	Control
Neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart were deliberately scheduled so that a potential practice effect cannot completely exclude.	MissingData
The neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart are deliberately scheduled so that we cannot completely exclude a practice effect.	StudyDesign
We deliberately scheduled our neuropsychological assessments 6 months apart, in order to exclude the potential practice effect.	Blinding
However, some of the primary outcomes from this study may not be universally translated into a larger set of communities or a range of self-sufficient areas, particularly living outside of our study.	MissingData
Furthermore, the study may not have been universally translated to all self-sufficient areas, particularly living in the primary outcomes of this study.	MissingData
The study may not be universally translated to areas that are sufficient areas for the primary outcomes in the community, particularly living in poverty or a sub-resettlement.	Generalization
Due to the design of the study may not be universally translated into fully-sufficient areas of a study, particularly living in one of the primary outcomes.	Generalization
Therefore the primary outcomes of our study may not universally translate into other and more frequently lived/subjective areas, particularly living outside of the study, especially living in a more urban or sedentary city environment.	Generalization
In some aspects of the study may not be universally translated, particularly living in self-sufficient areas, so the primary outcomes of the study may not be universally translated.	MissingData
The study may not be universally translated, particularly living in the more self-sufficient areas of the country where primary outcomes are reported, and thus may not be universally translated into the lives of people, particularly living in the more self-sufficient areas of the country.	StudyDuration
Therefore, our study may not be universally translated as the primary outcomes, particularly living in a rural population, are not necessarily co-sufficient areas.	StudyDuration
The study may not be universally translated, particularly living in less-sufficient areas for the primary outcomes.	Generalization
The primary outcomes of the study may not be universally translated across all communities, particularly living in the same self-sufficient areas where the intervention was undertaken, unless the intervention is designed to improve the health outcomes in such co-sufficient areas.	MissingData
This is a pragmatic trial that was not fully implemented in the implementation phase to accommodate shared after-hours laboratory services.	Generalization
A pragmatic trial in which only after-hours laboratory services were provided and no share of electronic patient records were offered, so there is no implementation phase to accommodate shared electronic patient records.	MissingData
The pragmatic trial is an opportunity to accommodate shared electronic patient records and after-hours laboratory services, but the implementation phase does not address the question of sharing laboratory services.	Control
This was a pragmatic trial that was designed as an implementation phase to accommodate shared electronic patient records, laboratory services, and after-hours laboratory services.	StudyDesign
The purpose of this pragmatic trial was to accommodate shared electronic patient records and after-hours laboratory services during the implementation phase of the clinical trial.	MissingData
In a pragmatic trial, the implementation phase must be in parallel with the use of shared electronic patient records, as part of a 24 hour laboratory services, or with sharing of the after-hours laboratory services and laboratory support.	StudyDesign
This pragmatic trial had no implementation phase to accommodate shared after-hours laboratory services or shared electronic patient records.	MissingData
This pragmatic trial was designed to accommodate shared, after-hour laboratory services and shared electronic patient records during the implementation phase of the study.	StudyDesign
In this pragmatic trial, the implementation phase is to accommodate shared after-hours laboratory services and shared electronic patient records.	MissingData
This pragmatic trial requires shared clinical laboratory services, shared electronic patient records, and an implementation phase to accommodate shared out-of-hours laboratory services.	StudyDesign
A time-based investigation of physical activity performed on the same day of child care attendance also represents another limitation.	MissingData
Finally, the time-based investigation of physical activity performed on the days of child care attendance represents another limitation in this time-based investigation.	Control
The child care attendance-based investigation of physical activity performed in this study was not related to child care attendance which represents another limitation.	Control
This results-based investigation of physical activity performed after child care attendance represents another limitation in our results.	StudyDesign
This is not a limitation of the time-based investigation of physical activity performed on site, but it does represent another limitation.	Blinding
Therefore, the time-based investigation of physical activity performed outside child care attendance represents another limitation of our study.	MissingData
Secondly, the time-based investigation of physical activity performed by the children was done with child care attendance, which represents another limitation of the study.	MissingData
The child care attendance-based investigation of physical activity performed in the study was at average wearing time 3 hours and a half. This represents another limitation.	MissingData
The child care attendance and mean wearing time of the child care-based investigation may have limited the data we were able to collect, which represents another limitation of the evidence-based investigation.	MissingData
Thus, the child care attendance component of the ANC-based investigation of physical activity performed on a day of child care attendance, which represents another limitation of the study, because this participant-centered investigation was done at 2 days before child care attendance.	Blinding
Because other active interventions might offer comparable doses of flexibility training, we cannot ascribe to the exercise a similar therapeutic effect.	StudyDesign
Therefore, we cannot ascribe any therapeutic effects to any of the other active interventions, which might offer comparable doses of strength, flexibility or aerobic training.	Control
We cannot ascribe any therapeutic effects to this intervention since other active interventions (e.g., fitness, physical activity) might offer comparable doses and/or durations of resistance and flexibility training might offer comparable doses.	Control
Because flexibility training was the only active intervention, we cannot ascribe therapeutic effects to the other active interventions which might offer comparable doses of intensity or duration.	StudyDuration
We cannot ascribe the therapeutic effects of flexibility training to other active interventions that might offer comparable doses of these active interventions.	Control
Therefore, we cannot ascribe therapeutic effects to other active interventions that might offer comparable doses of flexibility training.	StudyDuration
Thus, because we did not use active interventions that might offer comparable doses of flexibility training, we cannot ascribe therapeutic effects.	MissingData
We cannot ascribe therapeutic effects to other active interventions that might offer comparable doses of strength, flexibility training and exercise.	StudyDuration
This study was not controlled for differences between the active interventions. However, it cannot ascribe therapeutic effects to different exercises that might offer comparable doses of PT, physiotherapy or stretching and flexibility training.	Blinding
This is because flexibility training might offer comparable doses of active interventions. Therefore, we cannot ascribe to this exercise the therapeutic effects of the other two active interventions that might offer comparable doses.	MissingData
We terminated the study after definitive analysis of the expert opinion.	MissingData
In the interest of completing definitive analysis of expert opinion of the patient, the study was terminated.	Blinding
We terminated the study after definitive analysis of an expert opinion in the interest of patients.	MissingData
Due to a disagreement with our expert opinion, we terminated the trial in the patient's interest (to prevent definitive analysis of the expert opinion).	MissingData
The study was terminated after definitive analysis of the expert opinion of the board of the EAGLE Center and the decision of the PI to terminate the study.	MissingData
The study was terminated after definitive analysis of the expert opinion in patients.	Blinding
Upon receipt of the expert opinion, we terminated the study in our own interest and opted to conduct definitive analysis of our expert opinion on the etiology of bronchospasm in patients with bronchospasm.	StudyDuration
In the interest of patients' interests, we terminated the study after definitive analysis based on an expert opinion.	StudyDuration
After definitive analysis, we terminated the trial based on an expert opinion.	StudyDuration
Due to the conflict of interest, we terminated the study after definitive analysis based on the expert opinion of our clinicians.	StudyDuration
Lastly, we have observed a large number of people are often unable to report their hospital discharge assessment and so functional secondary outcomes measured at discharge are often unable to be included in these assessments.	Control
Of note, we found that a similar proportion of patients were often unable to meet the functional secondary outcomes measured at hospital discharge, which is also significant.	MissingData
However, it is also significant that patients are often unable to meet the assessments for functional secondary outcomes measured at hospital discharge, so the mean value for both outcomes is still lower than the mean value for those assessments.	Control
As mentioned previously, hospital discharge is often unable to determine functional secondary outcomes measured and therefore the association between these assessments and functional secondary outcomes measured is also significant.	Generalization
The fact that patients often unable to report at discharge are also significant in that assessments of functional secondary outcomes measured at hospital discharge are rarely completed.	Control
The fact that the assessments of functional secondary outcomes measured before and at hospital discharge are often unable to be fully implemented in the course of the study is also significant.	MissingData
Additionally, the functional secondary outcomes measured in our assessments at hospital discharge were often unable to be assessed at hospital discharge, and therefore it was also significant that patients were often unable to pass these assessments.	Generalization
Additionally, it is important to note that when we do have assessments of functional secondary outcomes measured, we are often unable to provide an accurate picture of our patients’ functional secondary outcomes measured.	MissingData
However, it was also significant that in the assessment of functional secondary outcomes measured at hospital discharge, we were often unable to assess these.	MissingData
The fact that functional secondary outcomes measured were also significant because patients often unable to recollect their assessments at hospital discharge (compared to their functional secondary outcomes measured at baseline and at discharge) because they were often unable to recall their assessments at discharge.	MissingData
The postal questionnaire was administered unmasked and patients were not asked to participate in a masked telephone interview or to participate in a reporting bias assessment.	Blinding
The postal questionnaire was not masked by telephone interview and there was no reporting bias of the assessment of patients.	Blinding
Data Collection We conducted a postal questionnaire for assessment of patients' psychopathology. There was no reporting bias for the masked telephone interview or postal questionnaire.	Blinding
In our study, we did not report reporting bias, but we did conduct a masked telephone interview, postal questionnaire, and did not use a mute-blind questionnaire to assess patients’ satisfaction.	Blinding
Masked telephone interview, postal questionnaire and reporting bias were not screened in the study.	Blinding
The post-mortem was a masked telephone interview with the patient and patients were not asked to report reporting bias.	Blinding
The patient survey was unmasked and there is reporting bias if the assessment of the patient’s health status is done by a single, unmasked telephone interview or postal questionnaire.	Blinding
The patient's assessment of their health status was performed after masked telephone interview and postal questionnaire with a reportable bias in reporting bias.	Blinding
Blinding was not performed because of unmasked telephone interview or postal questionnaire, nor because of reporting bias in the assessment of inflammatory factors in patients.	MissingData
The questionnaire was masked telephone interview and the postal questionnaire and was anonymous and there were no reports of reporting bias.	Blinding
The neurological improvement seen in the stroke patient could not have been predicted with a normal nhss scale and the HBA1c level was not changed after admission.	Blinding
A stroke patient could not have made neurologic improvement after admission if the nihss scale was not used.	Blinding
Therefore, stroke patient could have gained neurological improvement before admission, even though they were not able to complete the NISHS scale and HbA1c level on admission.	MissingData
Since stroke patient could be referred to our facility without admission, it is unlikely that neurological improvement by stroke patient could be measured using the NIHSS scale and HBA1c level at admission.	Control
A stroke patient could not have improved neurological improvement at admission by completing the NIHSS scale or an HbA1c level at the time of admission (at admission the stroke patient could not have achieved neurological improvement).	StudyDuration
During the time from admission of stroke patient could neurological improvement and a reduction in Hba1c level - but this could have been the exception.	MissingData
The admission of stroke patient could be explained by neurological improvement on the NISHS scale, HbA1c level, and CRP.	MissingData
Since admission, neurological improvement in stroke patient could be measured before admission.	Generalization
Although stroke patient could have shown neurological improvement on admission, a higher NIHSS scale and Hba1c level were not determined.	MissingData
The admission of a stroke patient could be associated with neurological improvement and lower Hba1c level than the patients with neurological improvement and higher NIMHSS scale scores.	StudyDuration
Additionally, Oseltamivir was the only active treatment given for severe influenza and H5N1 infections.	MissingData
Additionally, in patients with severe influenza and h5N1 infections, oseltamivir was not used as active treatment.	Control
Furthermore, in the previous two years, there were no patients who were exposed to oseltamivir and had severe influenza or H5N1 infections.	Blinding
Additionally, the treatment was prolonged in the nephritic patients with severe influenza who had not been actively treated with oseltamivir or had H5N1 infections.	MissingData
Furthermore, active treatment of severe influenza and H5N1 infections was not used.	Generalization
Additionally, since oseltamivir is a first-line active treatment for severe influenza and H5N1 infections, we do not know how long the effect of active treatment on severity of H5N1 infections remains.	MissingData
Additionally, we have not performed active treatment in patients with severe influenza (or h5N1 infections), but have no data to support this finding.	Blinding
Furthermore, we did not provide the full effect of active treatment in the treatment of severe influenza, nor H5N1 infections.	Generalization
Additionally, in this study we did not have any cases of severe influenza in which oseltamivir was active treatment; we did not have H5N1 infections.	MissingData
Additionally, we did not have any severe influenza patients treated with oseltamivir or H5N1 infections.	Generalization
We also conducted pragmatic trials to obtain prospective data on cardiovascular comorbidity, including results of these studies.	Control
We could not obtain prospective data in pragmatic trials, including results on cardiovascular comorbidity.	Control
It was not possible, in pragmatic trials, to obtain prospective data on causes of cardiovascular comorbidity and causes of death from cancer, including results of causes of death.	Blinding
In pragmatic trials of cardiovascular comorbidity, we were not able to obtain prospective data, including results of the study on causes and causes of stroke, vascular disease or pulmonary comorbidity.	MissingData
In pragmatic trials, it is also difficult to obtain prospective data on cardiovascular comorbidity, including results from the inclusion of causes of death.	Blinding
To date, there are no pragmatic trials that include results of causes, incidence or causes of cardiovascular comorbidity.	MissingData
In pragmatic trials, it is not possible to obtain prospective data on causes of cardiovascular comorbidity, including results of the trial and other causes of mortality.	StudyDuration
In pragmatic trials it is often difficult to obtain prospective data, including results of cardiovascular comorbidity, because the causes of death vary significantly.	Generalization
Because this was a pragmatic trial, it was not possible to obtain prospective data on cardiovascular comorbidity and causes of mortality, including results of the CII and ESI.	Generalization
Similarly, we were unable to obtain prospective data for pragmatic trials, including results of the studies on cardiovascular comorbidity and causes of CVD.	MissingData
This was not possible because of difficulties encountered in administration of placebo tablets in the treatment arm and difficulties encountered with early termination of the treatment arm.	Control
Due to the difficulty of obtaining placebo tablets and other oxandrolone preparations, the treatment arm was abandoned early due to difficulties with the administration of this drug in the treatment arm.	Blinding
Due to difficulties with the supply of placebo tablets in the treatment arm, early termination of the trial has occurred in the first group of patients.	MissingData
Because of difficulties, we could not provide patients with placebo tablets in the treatment arm or to advise on early termination of the treatment arm.	Control
The difficulties encountered in introducing placebo tablets lead to early termination of the treatment arm or difficulties in prescribing oxandrolone preparations.	Blinding
Due to the difficulties of the use of placebo tablets, early termination of the treatment arm was not possible due to the difficulties of oxandrolone preparations.	Randomization
Due to difficulties with oxandrolone preparations, the study was discontinued early due to difficulties with administration of placebo tablets.	MissingData
The lack of placebo tablets was a difficulty in establishing the treatment arm, which was associated with early termination of the treatment arm.	Control
We had difficulties administering placebo tablets during the treatment arm and early termination of the study was not possible because of difficulties in administering oxandrolone preparations in the hospital.	Blinding
Due to difficulties in making and providing the placebo tablets in the treatment arm, early termination of the study was not possible because of difficulties with the oxandrolone preparations in the study.	Blinding
In order to avoid confounding of our study, setting different blood pressure targets was introduced in the active control arm, which introduces different management strategies and may introduce confounding.	Randomization
A number of confounding variables were introduced by setting different blood pressure targets and other management strategies, which could have led to different confounding.	Control
Finally, we used a blinded, active control in all of our studies. Setting different blood pressure targets in these patients introduced confounding due to different management strategies.	Control
To avoid confounding, different management strategies such as setting different blood pressure targets and/or monitoring blood pressure were introduced by allowing an active control group and setting different blood pressure targets in the control group.	Blinding
Because of the different management strategies involved in setting different blood pressure targets, the study did not need an active control.	StudyDesign
The blinding effects of setting different blood pressure targets and different management strategies were eliminated by introducing an active control group to avoid confounding.	Control
Randomization Moreover, setting different blood pressure targets for both the active and passive groups introduced potential confounding effects and this is why we set different blood pressure targets for both groups and did not add any new strategy to the study.	Control
Since setting different blood pressure targets introduced different management strategies, confounding should not be introduced, since different blood pressure targets are not equally important in patients with different blood pressure targets.	MissingData
Setting different blood pressure targets in the active control and different management strategies introduced more confounding when setting different blood pressure targets.	Blinding
The active control group was introduced to avoid confounding as different management strategies could be introduced in different blood pressure targets.	Control
A crucial consideration for the correct interpretation of the results described applies to chronic conditions.	Control
A crucial consideration for the correct interpretation of the results described applies to chronic conditions.	Control
A crucial consideration in the correct interpretation of our findings is that the results described apply to acute and chronic conditions.	Control
A crucial consideration in the correct interpretation of our findings is the fact that the results described apply to chronic conditions.	Control
A crucial consideration for correct interpretation is whether the findings described apply to chronic conditions.	Control
Second, it is crucial consideration that the results described apply to chronic conditions and therefore allow for a correct interpretation of the findings.	Generalization
Another crucial consideration for the correct interpretation of the findings is whether the results described apply to chronic conditions.	MissingData
A crucial consideration in the correct interpretation of the findings described applies to chronic conditions.	Generalization
A crucial consideration is whether the findings described apply to chronic conditions and whether the correct interpretation is therefore possible.	Blinding
However, it is a crucial consideration whether the results described apply to all chronic conditions and whether the correct interpretation of the results is possible.	MissingData
Although the presentations also provided outcomes, the Hawthorne effect of participants achieving degrees of participation in the workshop was not fully understood.	Blinding
We also know that presentations also provided outcomes of degree (Hawthorne effect), which can explain why degrees were less likely to be reported (and hence, less information on the effect).	MissingData
The Hawthorne effect generated when recipients of presentations also provided outcomes in their own degrees.	MissingData
In addition, the Hawthorne effect was not generated by the presentation of degrees of knowledge.	Blinding
The presentations also provided outcomes for the participants who received degrees of Hawthorne effect (Hawthorne effect), so the results did not automatically relate to degrees of Hawthorne effect.	Blinding
The Hawthorne Effect generated by the degree of degrees received in presentations also provided outcomes.	MissingData
The Hawthorne effect is the effect of degrees of participation in the presentation received.	MissingData
Therefore, while the Hawthorne effect can be generated, presentations also provided outcomes for the researchers who received degrees of the Hawthorne effect.	MissingData
These presentations also provided outcomes, but this effect was not generated in any degree.	Blinding
Because all presentations also provided outcomes, some degrees of Hawthorne effect were generated.	MissingData
Firstly, as the placebo treatment group was based on placebo, therapist attention would not be required to ensure that patients receiving treatment received equal amounts of therapist attention would be received.	Control
Therefore, an equal amount of therapist attention would be required in the placebo treatment group, as would be required for patients receiving the treatment.	MissingData
The placebo treatment group did not receive any therapist attention would be required to be given to patients receiving the placebo treatment group.	Control
Likewise, a placebo treatment group would require a similar amount of therapist attention would be required of patients receiving treatment.	Control
Thus, a placebo treatment group with patients receiving an equal amount of therapist attention would be required.	Blinding
Patients receiving a placebo treatment group would be required to receive an equal amount of therapist attention would be required.	Blinding
However, an equal amount of therapist attention would be required among the placebo treatment group and those patients receiving treatment.	MissingData
Patients receiving the placebo treatment group had an equal amount of therapist attention would have been required.	MissingData
Patients receiving placebo treatment group, which did not require the same amount of therapist attention would be required in patients receiving placebo.	Blinding
Because patients receiving placebo treatment group should be required to have therapist attention would not be required to receive an equal amount of therapist attention.	MissingData
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes. This means that simple randomisation is entirely unpredictable and even coin toss randomisation can lead to unequal group sizes.	Randomization
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes, which is entirely unpredictable with restricted randomisation.	Randomization
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes which makes a simple randomisation completely unpredictable.	Randomization
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes.	Blinding
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes which were entirely unpredictable.	Randomization
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes, which is entirely unpredictable.	Randomization
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes and was therefore completely unpredictable.	Blinding
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes and restricted randomisation was therefore entirely unpredictable.	Blinding
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes, since this is an entirely unpredictable form of randomisation.	Randomization
Coin toss randomisation led to unequal group sizes, which is entirely unpredictable.	Randomization
If lithium would have been better described by natural disease, longer term studies in quantitative modeling of the effects of dosing are required.	Generalization
However, lithium would be best described by quantitative modeling in a longer term study.	MissingData
Without longer term studies, the best described pharmacokinetic effect of lithium would be through the qualitative modeling that quantitative modeling offers.	MissingData
Ideally, lithium would be best described by quantitative modeling over longer term studies involving a natural disease.	StudyDuration
However, in the long-term studies, where the effects of natural disease on the brain are not known, quantitative modeling of the effects of lithium would be best described.	MissingData
Eventually, the effects of lithium would be best described in shorter term studies, where quantitative modeling of natural disease might be more relevant.	Control
A natural disease such as lithium would be best described through quantitative modeling, which is more challenging in longer term studies.	MissingData
In addition, lithium would be best described in natural disease where quantitative modeling has been done in the short term.	MissingData
For our study, longer term studies of lithium would be best described by natural disease, and quantitative modeling would be necessary to address this gap.	MissingData
In addition, the effects of lithium would be best described in longer term studies of natural disease and quantitative modeling.	MissingData
Therefore, we need a longer term control interval for maximal treatment duration of metformin in chronic condition like obesity.	StudyDuration
We therefore did not conduct a controlled interval where maximal treatment duration of metformin was assessed.	Control
In addition to a longer term placebo-controlled interval, a longer term treatment duration for chronic condition like obesity is required.	MissingData
A longer term controlled interval may be necessary for metformin to achieve maximal treatment duration in chronic condition like obesity.	MissingData
We also determined that maximal treatment duration with metformin was required to achieve clinical benefit in a chronic condition like obesity.	MissingData
We will wait a longer term control interval before approving the maximal treatment duration of metformin, which will be required in a chronic condition like obesity.	Control
The control interval in this study was 58 weeks, but we did not control for a chronic condition like obesity at the maximal treatment duration.	Control
Furthermore, the maximal treatment duration of metformin at the controlled interval should be done over the longer term, especially for chronic condition like obesity.	MissingData
Secondly, in a chronic condition like obesity, the maximal treatment duration is often determined by the controlled interval and may be less well measured over a longer term than the control interval.	StudyDesign
A long term, longer term trial is needed to determine maximal treatment duration of metformin.	MissingData
I would caution against an extension to morbidly obese adults with severe influenza and underlying chronic illnesses.	Generalization
Therefore, we would caution against extension of this limitation to morbidly obese adults with severe influenza or underlying chronic illnesses.	MissingData
If one is concerned about the extension to morbidly obese adults with severe influenza, then one would caution against extending to this subgroup of patients, especially those with underlying chronic illnesses.	MissingData
Consequently, we would caution against an extension of this study to morbidly obese adults with severe influenza.	StudyDuration
I would caution, however, that in the case of severe influenza underlying chronic illnesses the extension of this observation would not be in the best interest of patients with obesity, and that it was a risk factor for severe influenza.	Generalization
In view of the extension of this study to morbidly obese adults with severe influenza, we would caution against extension to patients with underlying chronic illnesses.	MissingData
As an extension of the data from morbidly obese adults with severe influenza, I would caution against extension of the results from these studies to patients with underlying chronic illnesses.	MissingData
We would caution that by extension this extension could not be applied to morbidly obese adults with severe influenza and underlying chronic illnesses.	MissingData
However, we would caution against an extension of our findings to morbidly obese adults with severe influenza.	Generalization
I would caution the extension of this study to morbidly obese adults with severe influenza or underlying chronic illnesses.	Generalization
Randomization was imperfect and insufficient to produce balance and reproducibility in unmeasured characteristics of randomized trials.	Randomization
Randomization Randomization is imperfect, causing unmeasured characteristics and incomplete results to be observed in the randomized trials, which is why it is important to produce balance in randomization.	Blinding
Randomization is imperfect, in that it cannot produce balance in unmeasured characteristics.	Randomization
Randomization is imperfect, as it has no influence on the measure and unmeasured characteristics, which in randomized trials are not fully captured.	Randomization
Randomization is imperfect and produces balance of measured and unmeasured characteristics of randomized trials.	Randomization
Randomization is imperfect and cannot produce balance of measured characteristics between randomized trials.	Randomization
Randomization Randomization is imperfect in attempting to produce balance between measured and unmeasured characteristics.	Blinding
Randomization was imperfect because it did not produce balance between measured and unmeasured characteristics.	MissingData
Randomization is imperfect, as it does not produce balance of measured and unmeasured characteristics in randomized trials.	Randomization
Randomization was imperfect and did not produce balance between measured and unmeasured characteristics.	MissingData
Due to the exploratory nature of the study, it is not possible to make a formal sample size calculation.	MissingData
Due to the exploratory nature of the study, formal sample size calculation was not possible.	StudyDuration
Due to the exploratory nature of the study, a formal sample size calculation would not have been possible.	Blinding
Due to the exploratory nature of the study, formal sample size calculation is not possible.	Blinding
Because of the exploratory nature of the study, formal sample size calculation was not possible.	Blinding
Because of the exploratory nature of the study, it was not possible to make a formal sample size calculation.	Generalization
In the exploratory nature of the study, a formal sample size calculation was not possible.	StudyDuration
The exploratory nature of this study makes a formal sample size calculation unachievable.	StudyDesign
This exploratory nature of our study does not make a formal sample size calculation possible.	Blinding
We did not try to make formal sample size calculation possible in the exploratory nature of the study.	MissingData
This somewhat higher proportion of participants in two active arms might be explained by lower credibility in the experience of effectiveness, and so lower expectations.	MissingData
Thus, the somewhat higher proportion of subjects who experienced effectiveness in the two active arms might have been attributed to lower credibility and expectations, than had they not been treated in the two active arms.	MissingData
This somewhat higher proportion of participants in the two active arms might be due to lower credibility and lower expectations regarding effectiveness.	MissingData
A somewhat higher proportion of patients who completed two active arms might be due to lower credibility and higher expectations of effectiveness.	Generalization
However, the somewhat higher proportion of participants who received one or both active arms might reflect a lower credibility of effectiveness for the participants in two active arms.	MissingData
The somewhat higher proportion of the effectiveness among women in the two active arms might be explained by lower credibility, given its lower effectiveness expectations.	Blinding
However, a somewhat higher proportion of participants in both active arms might have been due to lower credibility or expectations related to the effectiveness of the intervention.	MissingData
Thus, the somewhat higher proportion of participants who have higher credibility in the effectiveness of the two active arms might be explained by expectations regarding their effectiveness.	MissingData
The somewhat higher proportion of participants in the two active arms might be due to lower credibility and lower expectations of effectiveness in this study.	Control
Because there was a somewhat higher proportion of participants who were not aware of effectiveness of both active arms might be related to lower credibility, and lower expectations of the effectiveness of the two active arms.	MissingData
This was due to limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data for children under the age of 10 years.	MissingData
In this study, we did not have sufficient pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data to predict the risk of toxicity in children less than 10 years of age.	MissingData
At age 10 there were limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data on rosiglitazone.	MissingData
We had limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data on rosiglitazone in children older than 10 years.	Generalization
Children had limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data for rosiglitazone after age 10.	Generalization
Due to the limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data, it is not possible to determine the age of the patients who receive rosiglitazone.	MissingData
There is limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data for children of age 10 years.	MissingData
We have limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data for children of the age of 10 years for rosiglitazone.	Blinding
We have limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data on rosiglitazone in children under 10 years of age.	MissingData
The reason for this is the limited pharmacokinetic–pharmacodynamic data for rosiglitazone in children over age 10 years of age.	Blinding
Data At 12 months, blood pressure was not available in 28 of patients randomised.	Blinding
Blood pressure was not available for 28.8% of patients randomised at 12 months.	MissingData
At 12 months, blood pressure was not available in 28.6% of patients randomised.	Blinding
At the time of the survey, blood pressure data from patients randomised to a 12 month resection were only 28.1% of patients randomised.	MissingData
At 12 months, a ten-point difference in blood pressure was only available in 28 patients randomised.	MissingData
We have not yet assessed blood pressure in 28 patients randomised at 12 months, so it is not possible to draw a generalizable conclusion about this.	MissingData
For 128 patients randomised blood pressure was available after 12 months.	MissingData
Data for 27 patients randomised to follow the 12-month course were not available.	MissingData
Blood pressure was not available in 28 patients randomised at 12 months.	MissingData
In our analysis, blood pressure and weight were not available for 28 patients randomised at 12 months.	Blinding
The incompleteness of the study and the lack of information about differences between patients withdrawn and those followed by the study on clinical outcome introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation.	Control
This incompleteness in patient withdrawn from the study, with differences in clinical outcome, introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation.	MissingData
This incompleteness of data and differences between patients withdrawn from the study before the end of the period of follow-up at baseline introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation of the clinical outcome.	MissingData
The incompleteness of the data (including incompleteness of the data and differences in clinical outcome among patients withdrawn from the study) introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation of differences in clinical outcome.	Control
As the incompleteness of data on clinical outcome in patients withdrawn from the study introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation of these differences, this could introduce uncertainty regarding interpretation of the results.	MissingData
Because of the incompleteness of the study it introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation of the differences in clinical outcome between patients withdrawn from the study and those not withdrawn, and also introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation of the results.	Blinding
Due to incompleteness of our analysis, it introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation of the differences between patients withdrawn and differences in clinical outcome.	MissingData
The incompleteness of the data introduced uncertainty regarding interpretation of the clinical outcome.	MissingData
This incompleteness also introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation of the clinical outcome between the patients withdrawn from the study and those with similar clinical outcome.	Generalization
This incompleteness introduces uncertainty regarding interpretation of differences between patients withdrawn from the study and their clinical outcome.	MissingData
With only 20 surviving participants who completed both postal questionnaires in both treatment groups, the number of fatal clinical events (excluding comorbidities and death) was similar among surviving participants from the two treatment groups.	MissingData
The postal questionnaire of the final questionnaire was completed by family doctors and the remaining surviving participants of both treatment groups.	MissingData
There were no statistically significant differences between the two treatment groups with respect to fatal clinical events, although we do not know what percentage of surviving participants died after finishing the postal questionnaire.	MissingData
Only surviving participants were able to complete the postal questionnaire of the intervention and had to see their family doctors who were not able to give consent for the postal questionnaire.	Blinding
The postal questionnaire was administered to surviving participants at the last appointment of one of the two treatment groups.	Blinding
Survivors of the two treatment groups were interviewed using a postal questionnaire, and the majority of them completed the questionnaire, but three surviving participants had no fatal clinical events.	MissingData
The postal questionnaire was distributed to surviving participants who had never done treatment nor had a fatal clinical event in the two treatment groups, and they were randomly allocated to one of the two treatment groups.	Blinding
Inclusion of the postal questionnaire was limited to surviving participants in the two treatment groups and in the case of fatal clinical events in both groups.	StudyDesign
The second study in this study was randomized to two treatment groups by postal questionnaire.	Blinding
We only had surviving participants from both treatment groups who completed the postal questionnaire and the only fatal clinical events among the surviving participants were at least 3%.	MissingData
We did not have the opportunity to observe the remodeling transient associated with increased calcium intake.	MissingData
The degree of remodeling transient induced by increased calcium intake cannot be determined until we observe a complete reduction in change in end-state bone mass after increasing calcium intake.	Control
The effects of increased calcium intake on remodeling transients in state bone mass cannot be determined in isolation, so we cannot investigate the effect of increased calcium intake on remodeling transients in state bone mass.	Generalization
We did not have the time to determine whether the remodeling transient associated with increased calcium intake was related to increased state bone mass.	Generalization
We could not determine whether this remodeling transient caused by increased calcium intake, or whether this change in state bone mass and marrow volume was a permanent result of increased calcium intake, or whether this was merely a remodeling transient.	Control
The remodeling transient was most likely due to increased calcium intake; however, it will be difficult to determine whether the effect was permanent or even prolonged by increased calcium intake.	StudyDuration
We will determine whether this remodeling transient is exacerbated by increased calcium intake, as it might be during the onset of steady-state bone mass.	Control
This reversal of state bone mass in response to increased calcium intake was not a remodeling transient, which means that it was not possible to determine whether increased calcium intake was a marker for long-term remodeling transients.	MissingData
Although we do not know whether increased calcium intake caused the remodeling transient, it is very difficult to determine whether the effect of increased calcium intake on remodeling transient had occurred.	StudyDuration
Although we cannot determine whether the remodeling transient is driven by increased calcium intake, it is necessary to understand that the increase in steady-state bone mass is more than a temporary induced by increased calcium intake.	MissingData
Due to the nature of psychosocial interventions, participants were not blinded to clinical staff.	Blinding
Due to the nature of psychosocial interventions, participants were not blinded to the nature of clinical staff’s treatment.	Blinding
Because of the nature of psychosocial interventions participants were not blinded.	Blinding
Due to the nature of psychosocial interventions, the participants were not blinded to the clinical staff.	Blinding
Due to the nature of psychosocial interventions, participants and clinical staff were not blinded.	Blinding
Due to the nature of psychosocial interventions, participants and clinical staff were blinded.	Blinding
Due to the nature of psychosocial interventions, the clinical staff were blinded to the participants' mental and physical health.	Blinding
Because of the nature of psychosocial interventions, participants were blinded to clinical staff.	Blinding
Given the nature of psychosocial interventions, participants were blinded to clinical staff and members of the study group.	Blinding
Due to the nature of psychosocial interventions, participants and clinical staff were not blinded.	Blinding
As previously stated, the DCM observations were limited due to the availability of data collection facilities.	MissingData
As previously stated, the duration of data collection for DCM observations was limited due to the availability of a central central station, which is an unreliable source of data.	MissingData
Data collection was limited due to availability of DCM observations.	Generalization
As previously stated, the number of dCM observations were limited due to the availability of dCM observations in the field.	MissingData
As previously stated, the availability of data collection for DCM observations was limited due to the high costs of the DCM instrument, a requirement in the DCM guidelines.	MissingData
As previously stated, data collection was limited due to the availability of the dcm observations.	MissingData
The availability of the DCM observations was previously stated to be limited due to cost and time limitations.	Generalization
As previously stated, data collection was limited due to the availability of the DCM observations.	MissingData
As previously stated, data collection of the DCM observations was limited due to the limited availability of the instrument.	MissingData
With 24 study centers, there was a certain deviation of 4% patients from the study controls in the better balance of treatment among these centers.	Blinding
Of the 24 study centers, a certain deviation in the study sample population of 4 patients was observed in the remaining 8 study centers, indicating the lack of better balance between patients and centers.	Control
A n additional 7 centers provided better balance with regard to the number of patients enrolled, but this led to a certain deviation in number of patients enrolled in the study.	MissingData
Out of 24 study centers, an additional 7 centers had a better balance of 24% patients and 16% of patients did not.	StudyDuration
Thus, we could not be sure of a better balance in the data between all 24 study centers, a certain deviation from the average of the 4 patients, or of a better balance.	MissingData
With the addition of 24 study centers, we found better balance, resulting in a reduced total of 4 patients.	MissingData
There was a certain deviation between our 24 study centers with a better balance of participants at 4 centers and no patient at 4 centers.	Blinding
In all 24 study centers, there was a better balance of 3-4 patients across study centers, but there was a certain deviation from that balance among all centers in the study.	Randomization
A different balance was obtained across the 24 study centers in which 4 patients were assigned to study centers where there was a certain deviation from a better balance in terms of the treatment of the 4 patients.	Randomization
Outcome The second largest effect was that of a certain deviation from the 2%-4% patient average in 24 study centers in the corresponding years.	Randomization
In three interventions we found drop-outs (1%; i.e., no drop-outs at randomization).	MissingData
In three interventions we found drop-outs (IDR, EMG and CMA).	Randomization
During randomization, we found drop-outs in three interventions (e.g., the two interventions received the highest number of drop-outs).	Blinding
We found drop-outs in three interventions (avoidance, treatment, and reselection) among the randomization group and found no difference in the use of the intervention or intervention at randomization.	Randomization
We also found drop-outs in three interventions (i.e., in-nouts).	Randomization
We did not find drop-outs of intervention drop-outs after randomization (i.e.	Randomization
In addition to randomization, we found drop-outs in three interventions (i.e., not correlated with placebo) after randomization.	Blinding
We found drop-outs in all three interventions at randomization, i.e., at randomization.	MissingData
Thus, no effect of three interventions was found drop-outs (i.e., non-randomization).	Randomization
Hence, we found drop-outs in the other two (all interventions) at randomization (see Section 7.1.1).	Randomization
This is the main limitation of the study and relates to early termination of the study.	StudyDuration
This is the main limitation of the study. Early termination was the main limitation.	StudyDuration
This is the main limitation of the study and explains the early termination.	StudyDuration
This study was delayed by early termination and is thus a main limitation of the study.	StudyDuration
Due to early termination of the study, the main limitation of the study was the lack of evidence.	MissingData
The main limitation of the study is early termination.	StudyDuration
The main limitation of the study was its early termination.	StudyDuration
Early termination of the study was the main limitation.	StudyDuration
The main limitation of the study was early termination.	StudyDuration
Early termination was the main limitation of the study.	StudyDuration
The chance imbalance in the ursodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation of the endpoints related to premature delivery difficult.	Blinding
The ursodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation of endpoints related to multiple pregnancy and premature delivery more difficult because of chance imbalance.	MissingData
Moreover, our chance imbalance for endpoints related to multiple pregnancy (such as premature delivery or urodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation of our results less clear.	MissingData
The multiple pregnancy URSO comparison made interpretation of the endpoints related to premature delivery harder because of a chance imbalance.	StudyDesign
Because chance imbalances in endpoints related to multiple pregnancy and premature delivery accounted for less of the variance in URSodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation of this report more difficult.	MissingData
A chance imbalance in endpoints related to multiple pregnancy, premature delivery and ursodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation of the results more difficult.	MissingData
The chance imbalance in endpoints related to multiple pregnancy and premature delivery in the ursodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation difficult.	StudyDuration
The chance imbalance between multiple pregnancy and premature delivery is also a factor that makes interpretation of endpoints related to the ursodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation difficult.	Control
The ursodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation of the endpoints related to multiple pregnancy and premature delivery more difficult.	Randomization
Since the chance imbalance in multiple pregnancy and premature delivery, the ursodeoxycholic acid comparison made interpretation of these endpoints related to multiple pregnancy difficult.	MissingData
Thus, this outcome might be due to the limited number of observations (2 h observations using DCM, 2 time points).	MissingData
This outcome might be explained by the limited number of observations (4 time points) using dcm.	StudyDuration
The limited number of observations (n = 4 time points) might have affected the outcome since we only conducted 2 h observations using DCM.	Blinding
Therefore, the outcome might be limited because we only used 2 h observations using DCM at 4 time points.	Blinding
The outcome might have been influenced by the limited number of observations using DCM at 4 time points.	Control
Lastly, the limited number of observations (3 times points) and the outcome might be related to the 2 h observations using DCM.	Blinding
The limited number of observations (2 h observations using dcm) might have led to a different outcome, as 2 h observations using dcm was done at 4 time points.	Blinding
We were unable to control for the 4 time points, so this outcome might be due to the limited number of 2 h observations using DCM.	MissingData
As there were 4 time points, a limited number of 2 h observations using DCM could have been a factor in the outcome, and this observation was not extended to the next 2 h.	Generalization
The 2 h observations using DCM at 4 time points, with a limited number of observations, can explain this outcome.	Blinding
Since we did not have a frequent follow-up point owing to previous problems, we only selected one follow-up point owing to high attrition rates.	StudyDuration
Because we have only one follow-up point owing to previous problems with high attrition rates we cannot include a frequent follow-up point.	MissingData
Although the sample was small and frequent, there was only one follow-up point owing to previous problems with high attrition rates at this point.	Control
We chose one follow-up point owing to previous problems of high attrition rates at this time point.	MissingData
One follow-up point owing to previous problems with frequent follow-up points, is the only follow-up point owing to the high attrition rates.	Control
One follow-up was needed owing to previous problems of high attrition rates at frequent follow-up points.	MissingData
We only conducted one follow-up point owing to previous problems with high attrition rates at one follow-up point.	Generalization
One follow-up point owing to previous problems infrequent follow-ups with high attrition rates.	MissingData
One follow-up point owing to previous problems with high attrition rates and frequent follow-ups had to be selected at one follow-up point.	Randomization
There were no missing data at one follow-up point owing to previous problems with frequent follow-ups and high attrition rates.	MissingData
While patients alleged medical reasons for leaving the intervention, their personal motivation may have contributed to the dropout rate.	MissingData
Our dropout rate may have contributed to the intervention if patients alleged medical reasons for not participating in the intervention.	Blinding
Therefore, a personal motivation may have contributed to the low dropout rate of the intervention, when patients alleged medical reasons for quitting the intervention.	Control
Our study was conducted in a patient-centered manner and some of our patients alleged medical reasons for completing the intervention and thereby contributed to the dropout rate.	MissingData
Although patients alleged medical reasons for dropping out of the intervention, their personal motivation may have contributed to the lower dropout rate.	MissingData
Patients alleged medical reasons for their absence during the intervention, which may have contributed to the dropout rate.	Generalization
Patients alleged medical reasons for discontinuing the intervention, which may have contributed to the lower dropout rate.	Generalization
Patient alleged medical reasons for stopping the intervention, which may have contributed to the high dropout rate after the intervention.	MissingData
Personal motivation may have contributed to the low dropout rate, mainly because patients alleged medical reasons for withdrawing from the intervention.	MissingData
Patients alleged medical reasons that contributed to the dropout rate, but personal motivation may have contributed.	Blinding
A six month follow-up is a more realistic time point for the effect of treatments for cutaneous warts, but shorter time frames may provide a more accurate measure of the effect of treatments.	Blinding
A six month follow-up seems like a more realistic time point to treat cutaneous warts compared to shorter time frames.	StudyDesign
A six month follow-up is a more realistic time point for treatments of cutaneous warts than shorter time frames.	StudyDuration
A six month follow-up is a realistic time point for studies of treatments for cutaneous warts.	StudyDuration
A six month follow up is a more realistic time point for the assessment and treatment of cutaneous warts and is less invasive than shorter time frames.	MissingData
A six month follow up is a more realistic time point for cutaneous warts than shorter time frames.	Control
Six month follow-up is a more realistic time point to compare treatments and shorter time frames to evaluate the improvement of cutaneous warts.	Control
A six month follow-up is a more realistic time point to determine the effectiveness of treatments in patients with cutaneous warts, although shorter time frames may be used.	Blinding
Six month follow-up is a more realistic time point for cutaneous warts compared with shorter time frames (three months, six months, twelve months, 18 months).	Generalization
A six month follow-up is a more realistic time point for cutaneous warts compared to shorter time frames.	Control
Blinding resulted in one explanation for the performance bias in the Movement Biofeedback Group that clinician blinding resulted in.	Blinding
One explanation for this is that clinician blinding resulted in poor performance bias) for the Movement Biofeedback group.	Blinding
One explanation for this may be that clinician blinding resulted in performance bias).	Blinding
For one explanation, clinician blinding resulted in a performance bias in the Movement Biofeedback group.	Blinding
One explanation for this is that clinician blinding resulted in no performance bias (the movement biofeedback group members had been blinded to their fellow group-based Care Group clinicians).	Blinding
One explanation for this may be that clinician blinding resulted in an incomplete recruitment of Movement Biofeedback Group clinicians, which may have led to performance bias).	Blinding
One explanation of clinician blinding resulted from the group-based care group clinicians being not blinded (performance bias).	Blinding
In addition, clinician blinding resulted in only 1% of Movement Biofeedback group clinicians being able to distinguish movement/performance bias).	Blinding
Clinician blinding resulted in one explanation of the high performance bias in the Movement Biofeedback group (though this could also be attributed to clinician blinding).	Blinding
Blinding resulted from clinician blinding resulted in the patient-based Care Group clinicians being blinded to movement biofeedback group participants (one explanation for performance bias).	Blinding
The use of statin-lowering drugs, usually simvastatin, after routine unblinding was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin (>70%) during the trial follow-up period.	Blinding
During routine unblinding, the rate of overdose with cholesterol-lowering drugs was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin at the beginning of the trial follow-up, which is usually simvastatin.	Blinding
In addition, the number of people taking statin-lowering drugs during trial follow-up was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin (typically simvastatin) after routine unblinding.	Blinding
The proportion of participants initially allocated to statins after routine unblinding was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin but was not disproportionally significant after routine unblinding and only slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin after trial follow-up.	Blinding
The proportion of participants initially allocated to statin-lowering drugs in our trial was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin during routine unblinding, usually simvastatin.	Blinding
In addition, the rate of routine unblinding was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin (usually simvastatin), despite routine unblinding for cholesterol-lowering drugs.	Blinding
During trial follow-up, the effect of cholesterol-lowering drugs, usually simvastatin, was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin, despite routine unblinding.	Blinding
During routine unblinding the proportion of participants initially allocated simvastatin to SSRIs was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin in post-trial follow-up (and thus probably less than half of participants originally allocated simvastatin).	Blinding
The effect of cholesterol-lowering drugs was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin, following routine unblinding during trial follow-up, but this was not a significant change from the effect of other cholesterol-lowering drugs in the previous two years of the study.	Blinding
Moreover, the number of patients with chronic valvular disease (CVD)-lowering drugs during trial follow-up was slightly higher among participants originally allocated simvastatin, after routine unblinding (silvastatin was the most frequent).	Blinding
We used a passive management strategy (a computer based algorithm which suggested drug changes) and did not have a study adherence monitor in which patients received only “usual care.”	Control
Our computer based algorithm suggested drug changes in the first 3 months, whereas the follow up 6 months after the intervention was more like simply receiving “usual care.”	Blinding
Although the passive management strategy is suggested by the computer based algorithm, it is more likely that we are simply receiving “usual care.”	StudyDuration
A computer based algorithm suggested drug changes in patients simply receiving “usual care.”	Control
A computer based algorithm suggested drug changes that may not have been in accordance with the algorithm’s suggested drug changes in systolic blood pressure but could have helped patients receiving simply receiving “usual care.”	Control
Similarly, after the computer based algorithm suggested drug changes in systolic blood pressure, the patient was randomized to either a systolic or diastolic blood pressure (SBP) or simply receiving “usual care.”	StudyDuration
This was an algorithmic strategy (a computer based algorithm that suggested drug changes, which was then not randomized). We did not employ a passive management strategy whereby the patient was simply receiving “usual care.”	Blinding
Our computer based algorithm suggested drug changes for systolic blood pressure and this was a passive management strategy based on simply receiving “usual care.”	StudyDuration
A computer based algorithm suggested drug changes at baseline and suggested drug changes at day 10 after systolic blood pressure reduction.	Control
This is due to the low systolic blood pressure at baseline that was not influenced by the computer based algorithm that suggested drug changes.	Blinding
However, most interactions are significant, but in many interactions they are not.	MissingData
However, many interactions tested between variables were significant in only three cases.	Control
However, many interactions tested were not significant.	MissingData
However, many interactions tested were not significant.	MissingData
However, many interactions, including interactions on the main effects of the various chemicals that are tested for their importance, were not significant, as they were not correlated with other effects.	MissingData
However, only three of the many interactions tested in our database were significant.	MissingData
Fortunately, only three of many interactions tested were significant.	Control
However, three out of the many interactions tested were significant.	MissingData
However, many interactions tested were significant for three out of five t-tests.	Blinding
However, many interactions tested are significantly significant.	Blinding
However, it is important—particularly in light of the moderated effects—that the results be interpreted with caution and should be interpreted with care.	StudyDuration
Because moderated effects—and this is important—particularly in the case of an unmediated effect—should be interpreted with caution.	Generalization
A caution should be applied to replicated effects—especially with moderated effects—where possible.	Control
Although it is important—particularly in light of the moderated effects—that these observations are replicated, caution should be used in their interpretation.	Control
It is important—particularly for these moderated effects—that these observations be interpreted with caution and should be replicated with great care.	Generalization
The data can be interpreted with caution—particularly since the moderated effects—are not replicated.	Control
Therefore, our data need to be interpreted with caution—particularly for moderated effects—which were not replicated.	Randomization
Therefore, it is important—particularly to be cautious when interpreting the results of this study—that moderated effects—if observed—be interpreted with caution and with caution.	Control
But it is important—particularly as it may be interpreted with caution—to evaluate the replication of moderated effects—such as the difference between the first and second week, as they are more likely to be moderated.	Generalization
A caution in interpreting our results—especially with regard to moderated effects—is important—particularly in light of our limitations.	Randomization
In this study neither treatment group had a complete clearance rate, and the cryotherapy group had a lower natural resolution rate.	Control
In this study neither treatment was associated with complete clearance in the salicylic acid group, nor with the cryotherapy group.	MissingData
In the present study neither treatment (salicylic acid group, cryotherapy group, and both were complete clearance in the scab) was statistically significant and that of a placebo (sodium sulfate), was reported.	Control
In this study neither treatment group had a complete clearance rate (natural resolution rate) and a 12% difference between the two groups.	MissingData
In this study neither treatment group in the study had complete clearance nor a higher natural resolution rate than in the salicylic acid group.	Control
In this study neither treatment group (salicylic acid group or cryotherapy group) had complete clearance and the natural resolution rate was 1%.	MissingData
In this study neither treatment (salicylic acid group or cryotherapy group) showed complete clearance of disease (neural resolution rate).	Generalization
Another limitation is that participants in this study did not complete registrations for all cost categories and they did not complete EQ5D summary scores.	MissingData
Another limitation is that participants were not asked to complete registrations and to provide EQ5D summary scores and costs categories for all participants.	MissingData
Another limitation was the limited number of participants who completed registrations for all cost categories in EQ5D summary scores.	MissingData
Another limitation of the study is that participants did not complete registrations for all cost categories, which is further hampered by incomplete registrations and eQ5D summary scores.	StudyDuration
Another limitation of the study was that participants were required to complete registrations for the cost categories, and thus to produce EQ5D summary scores.	MissingData
Another limitation is that participants were required to complete registrations for all cost categories, and so EQ5D summary scores did not match.	MissingData
Another limitation is that participants were required to complete registrations in cost categories and to provide EQ5D summary scores.	MissingData
Another limitation of the study was the absence of complete registrations in all cost categories and the EQ5D summary scores.	MissingData
Another limitation is that participants did not complete registrations for all cost categories, therefore EQ5D summary scores may not be complete.	StudyDesign
Another limitation was that participants did not complete registrations in all cost categories (EQ5D summary scores).	MissingData
The quantitative pretest probability web tool applies to chest pain only.	MissingData
The quantitative pretest probability web tool applies to all patients with chest pain.	MissingData
This applies to patients with chest pain who use the quantitative pretest probability web tool.	Randomization
The quantitative pretest probability web tool does not apply to chest pain.	MissingData
The quantitative pretest probability web tool applies to chest pain only.	Control
The quantitative pretest probability web tool applies to all patients with chest pain.	StudyDesign
The quantitative pretest probability web tool applies to chest pain and is an excellent way to measure a pre-dosage condition of the spleen.	Blinding
The quantitative pretest probability web tool applies to all patients with chest pain.	Blinding
The quantitative pretest probability web tool applies to chest pain only.	Blinding
The quantitative pretest probability web tool applies to all patients with chest pain.	Blinding
It would also be important to consider whether the recruitment of treating clinicians would also affect selection bias.	Blinding
It would also be worth noting that the recruitment of treating clinicians to this randomised controlled trial would also be highly sensitive to selection bias.	MissingData
However, the presence of treating clinicians would also be a risk of recruitment in this randomised controlled trial.	Randomization
I would also add that recruitment of treating clinicians would also be a concern, as would also be any selection bias that might occur from the recruitment of other participants within the randomised controlled trial.	Blinding
However, it would also be possible that treatment clinicians were not recruited into the randomised controlled trial.	Blinding
Would also be a benefit to recruit patients to a randomised controlled trial and not to introduce selection bias in their recruitment and treatment.	MissingData
We also would not have recruited treating clinicians in the randomised controlled trial.	Blinding
Additionally, it would also be possible to avoid selection bias in recruitment, which is often associated with randomised controlled trials.	Control
If this were a randomised controlled trial, selection bias would also be due to the role of treating clinicians in the recruitment and recruitment of participants.	Blinding
It would also be appropriate to assess for selection bias prior to recruitment of treating clinicians into a randomised controlled trial.	Blinding
Therefore, furthermore, it is questionable whether the study hypothesis using the egfr is appropriate.	Control
It is also questionable whether the study hypothesis using the EGFR was appropriate, and furthermore, it is not clear whether the use of a single, unpublished, study participant was appropriate in the absence of an egfr.	Control
Furthermore, it is questionable whether the study hypothesis using the EGFR was appropriate.	Blinding
Furthermore, it is questionable whether the study hypothesis using the EGFR was appropriate.	StudyDesign
It is also questionable whether the study hypothesis using the eGFR was appropriate.	Control
Furthermore, it is questionable whether our study hypothesis using the EGFR was appropriate.	Control
Furthermore, it is questionable whether our study hypothesis using the EGFR was appropriate.	Blinding
Furthermore, it is questionable whether the study hypothesis using the EGFR was appropriate.	Blinding
Furthermore, it is questionable whether the study hypothesis using the eGFR is appropriate.	MissingData
Furthermore, it may be questionable whether the study hypothesis using the EGFR was appropriate.	StudyDesign
This problem raises questions about generalisability.	Generalization
This problem raises questions about generalisability.	Generalization
This problem raises questions about generalisability.	Generalization
This problem raises questions about generalisability.	Generalization
This problem raises questions about generalisability.	Generalization
The major assumption underlying the primary analysis model is that treatment assignment was independently associated with initial weight loss and there was no significant interaction between treatment assignment and initial weight loss.	MissingData
The major assumption underlying the primary analysis model was that there was a significant interaction between initial weight loss and treatment assignment.	MissingData
The major assumption underlying the primary analysis model is that there is no significant interaction between initial weight loss and treatment assignment.	MissingData
The major assumption underlying our primary analysis model is that there was no significant interaction between initial weight loss and treatment assignment.	Blinding
The major assumption underlying the primary analysis model was that treatment assignment did not predict outcome, but that there was no significant interaction between initial weight loss and the primary analysis model.	MissingData
The major assumption underlying this study was that there was no significant interaction between treatment assignment and initial weight loss, and the result of the primary analysis model.	Blinding
Considering this significant interaction, we also assumed that the primary analysis model of treatment assignment was appropriate to predict the initial weight loss.	Control
Due to our treatment assignment there was no significant interaction between treatment assignment and initial weight loss, the major assumption underlying the primary analysis model.	Control
As a major assumption underlying the primary analysis model was a significant interaction between treatment assignment and initial weight loss.	Blinding
The major assumption underlying treatment assignment was a significant interaction between initial weight loss and the treatment assignment.	Blinding
The study was conducted after 18 months of observation, thereby allowing the formulation and determination of associations and risk predictions.	Control
The study utilised a multivariate design based on associations, thereby allowing the formulation of risk predictions.	MissingData
We standardized associations between risk predictions for BMIs and comorbidities, thereby allowing the formulation of risk predictions and the determination of risk.	Control
We did not control for association between the groups at all, thereby allowing more generalisation and a more flexible formulation of risk predictions.	MissingData
The findings of our SSRNs were matched to patients and associated with an increased risk prediction, thereby allowing the formulation of the risk predictions and assessment of associations.	Control
We did not investigate associations between risk predictions and patient outcome, thereby allowing the determination of associations and formulation of risk predictions.	Generalization
The present study was designed to allow the determination of associations between risk predictions and cardiovascular risk, thereby allowing the formulation of risk predictions.	StudyDuration
The primary outcome was the formulation of risk predictions, thereby allowing the determination of associations and the formulation of risk predictions.	StudyDuration
For this study, we relied on an observational design thereby allowing the determination of associations, and formulation of risk predictions.	MissingData
Thus, we used the same risk predictions for a comparison of two groups, thereby allowing the determination of associations and formulation of risk predictions.	StudyDuration
Our usual care control followed the overarching practical goal of evaluating the potential benefits of a usual care intervention for osteopenic women.	StudyDesign
Our usual care control followed a single osteopenic woman.	StudyDuration
In the usual care control followed, the overarching practical goal was to investigate the potential benefits of this treatment for osteopenic women.	MissingData
Moreover, as the overarching practical goal of our study was to compare normal care with usual care, it makes sense that the usual care control followed an osteopenic women’s usual care in order to assess their potential benefits.	Control
Because the overarching practical goal of the study was to increase the presence of routine care in osteopenic women, it was also decided to follow up the usual care control followed by our usual care.	MissingData
The overarching practical goal was to assess the potential benefits of usual care for osteopenic women and to assess the clinical outcome.	Generalization
Thus, we considered the potential benefits of usual care only if a control followed the overarching practical goal of the study, namely to maximise the effect of usual care on osteopenic women.	MissingData
Our usual care control followed an overarching practical goal of evaluating the potential benefits of conventional care for osteopenic women.	Control
The overarching practical goal of this study is to test the potential benefits of normal care among osteopenic women when the usual care control followed treatment.	MissingData
In all three studies, our overarching practical goal was to assess the possible benefits of a usual care control followed by follow-up for osteopenic women.	Control
Firstly, we blinded experienced anesthesiologists to nonuse of stylets.	Blinding
First, we were blinded to the nonuse of stylets by experienced anesthesiologists.	Blinding
First, we did not have experienced anesthesiologists blinded to nonuse of stylets.	Blinding
First, we were not blinded to the use of stylests by experienced anesthesiologists.	Blinding
First of all, experienced anesthesiologists did not blind us to the use of stylets.	Blinding
First, we were blinded to the use and nonuse of stylets by the experienced anesthesiologists in the ED.	Blinding
First of all, we were blinded to the use of stylets by experienced anesthesiologists.	Blinding
First of all, we were blinded to the use or nonuse of stylests by experienced anesthesiologists.	Blinding
First, we were blinded to the nonuse of stylets and to experienced anesthesiologists who performed the intervention.	Blinding
First of all, experienced anesthesiologists were blinded to the nonuse of stylets.	Blinding
This extension of the study cannot be extended to patients in advanced stages of type 2 DM especially.	StudyDuration
The study cannot be extended to patients in advanced stages of type 2 DMA especially at the early stages of the disease.	StudyDuration
Therefore, a study cannot be extended to patients in advanced stages of type 2 DM especially those with recurrent disease at a later time.	Generalization
Because this study cannot be extended to advanced stages of type 2 DMD especially those with type 2 DMM especially those with type 2 DMD.	Generalization
As such, this study cannot be extended to patients with type 2 DM especially in advanced stages.	MissingData
However, this extended study cannot be extended to other patients with type 2 DM especially in advanced stages.	Generalization
Because the study cannot be extended to patients in advanced stages of type 2 DSM especially in the advanced stages of DM, the study cannot be extended to patients who had already experienced DSM.	StudyDuration
In patients at advanced stages of type 2 Dm especially, the extension of this study cannot be extended to older patients.	StudyDuration
Thus, the extension of the study cannot be extended to patients with type 2 Dm especially at advanced stages of disease.	Generalization
Because this study cannot be extended to patients with type 2 DM especially at advanced stages of the disease, it cannot be extended beyond the early stages.	Generalization
Unfortunately, virologic response data could not be obtained because of the small sample size, compounding the situation.	MissingData
Unfortunately, there was no sequencing for virologic response data could have been obtained in this study, compounding the small sample size.	MissingData
Unfortunately, sequencing and virologic response data could not be collected in this study, compounding the small sample size.	MissingData
Unfortunately, virologic response data could not be collected in this study, compounding the small sample size.	Blinding
Unfortunately, sequencing data could not be obtained in our sample, compounding this small sample size.	MissingData
Unfortunately, our sequencing was done in a single site and therefore virologic response data could not be collected, compounding the small sample size.	MissingData
Unfortunately, sequencing and virologic response data could not be collected because of the small sample size, further compounding the problem.	Generalization
Unfortunately, the small sample size of the study meant that virologic response data could only be obtained by sequencing, compounding the situation.	MissingData
Unfortunately, the small sample size in this study meant that virologic response data could not be compared with clinical data, compounding the issue.	Control
However, sequencing was not possible in all cases, compounding this problem by our small sample size.	StudyDuration
Participants may have become familiar with neuropsychological assessments leading to a practice effect on their performance.	Blinding
Participants may have become familiar with neuropsychological assessments leading to the practice effect.	Control
The practice effect is not completely unexpected, but it does indicate that the participants may have become familiar with neuropsychological assessments leading to a learning effect.	StudyDuration
Participants may have become more familiar with the neuropsychological assessments leading to a practice effect.	Control
Thus, participants may become more familiar with neuropsychological assessments leading to a practice effect.	MissingData
The practice effect on participants may be due to the familiarity and/or familiarity with neuropsychological assessments leading to better performance on the assessments, with an increased ability to perform neuropsychological assessments leading to more favorable performances on these assessments.	StudyDesign
As a result, participants may become familiar with neuropsychological assessments leading to an improvement of their practice effect.	Randomization
Therefore, participants may have become familiar with the neuropsychological assessments leading to a practice effect.	StudyDuration
Neuropsychological assessments leading to better practice effect on participants may be less important since they are less familiar with the questions and techniques.	Control
Participants may have become familiar with neuropsychological assessments leading to a practice effect on their results.	Randomization
Participants may have altered the response to the experimental intervention and their behaviour after the intervention.	Control
Therefore, participants may have altered their behaviour in response to the experimental intervention.	Randomization
Therefore, participants may have altered their behaviour in response to the experimental intervention.	Blinding
However, participants may have altered their behaviour in response to the experimental intervention.	MissingData
Participants may have altered their behaviour, behavioural response, and response to the experimental intervention.	Blinding
The behaviour of participants may have been altered in response to the experimental intervention.	Generalization
Participants may have altered their behaviour in response to the experimental intervention.	Blinding
Participants may have altered their behaviour in response to experimental intervention.	Blinding
Participants may have altered their behaviour in response to the experimental intervention.	MissingData
Participants may have altered their behaviour in response to experimental intervention.	MissingData
A separate publication indicates that improvements in this area are generally maintained after a few months of treatment, although the effect of a different active therapy in this patient population was not observed in most patients.	MissingData
A separate publication indicates that improvements of sedation, or sedation-related effects, in active therapy are generally maintained after the end of treatment.	MissingData
A separate publication indicates that improvements in the use of active therapy are generally maintained following discontinuation of treatment after 6 months.	MissingData
A separate publication indicates that improvements generally maintained with active therapy.	Control
A separate publication indicates that improvements achieved with active therapy are generally maintained over a longer duration of treatment.	MissingData
A separate publication indicates that improvements associated with treatment with active therapy generally maintained throughout the course of treatment.	MissingData
A separate publication indicates that improvements attributed to active therapy were generally maintained over time.	Generalization
Although treatments with active therapy generally maintained improvements, a separate publication indicates that the effects of the treatment are not as well documented.	MissingData
A separate publication indicates that improvements in the efficacy of active therapy are generally maintained after treatment, although in previous studies some patients were not able to obtain any improvements.	StudyDuration
Nevertheless, a separate publication indicates that improvements in active therapy are generally maintained with treatment.	Generalization
The subjective sensation of temperature and body core temperature, which are useful supplements, to subjective sensation of oxygen consumption, is not a strong indicator of oxygen consumption.	MissingData
Skin temperature would be useful supplements to body core temperature, although it is difficult to determine when skin temperature would be useful supplements.	Blinding
Moreover, a subjective sensation of body core temperature and subjective sensation of skin temperature would be useful supplements to our body core temperature, allowing us to control the effects of oxygen consumption and body temperature on our bodies.	StudyDuration
Skin temperature would be useful supplements for subjective sensations of body core temperature and oxygen consumption.	Generalization
Besides skin temperature would be useful supplements to body core temperature and oxygen consumption.	MissingData
Skin temperature would be more useful supplements for subjective sensation of oxygen consumption than body core temperature, which is only helpful supplements for the subjective sensation of oxygen consumption.	MissingData
Skin temperature would be useful supplements to body core temperature, as it would be more sensitive to the subjective sensation of oxygen consumption.	Control
Hence, a subjective sensation of blood flow and body core temperature (or similar) and subjective sensations of oxygen consumption may not be useful supplements to subjective sensation of blood flow or temperature.	MissingData
Skin Temperatur would be useful supplements to body core temperature, which is only used in conjunction with the subjective sensation of oxygen consumption.	Blinding
Skin temperature would be useful supplements for body core temperature and subjective sensation of oxygen consumption.	Blinding
Finally, the reliance on only two time points restricted our ability to analyse the data.	StatisticalAnalysis
Finally, the two time points restricted our ability to analyse the data and have no ability to compare across time points.	Blinding
Finally, the reliance on two time points restricted our ability to analyse the results of this study.	Control
Finally, the reliance on only two time points restricted the ability to analyse the results.	MissingData
Finally, the reliance on two time points restricted the ability to analyse the data.	MissingData
Finally, reliance on these two time points restricted our ability to analyse the data.	StatisticalAnalysis
Finally, the use of two time points restricted the ability to analyse this sample.	MissingData
Finally, the reliance on two time points restricted our ability to analyse the results.	MissingData
Finally, the reliance on two time points restricted our ability to analyse this data.	MissingData
Finally, the reliance on two time points restricted the ability to analyse this data.	MissingData
Although we do not have information regarding lifestyle or physical activity, the results of our investigation in relation to biochemical results do not indicate that lifestyle is a key factor in the assessment of our findings.	MissingData
Unfortunately, information regarding lifestyle, physical activity, and information regarding lifestyle is not available for this assessment.	MissingData
Information regarding lifestyle and physical activity was not available for our assessment, and thus we could not obtain biochemical results.	MissingData
Although the information regarding lifestyle and physical activity were available for assessment, it was not possible to do a more thorough assessment of the biochemical results from the assessment.	MissingData
Because information regarding lifestyle and physical activity is not always available, we decided to conduct an assessment of biochemical results.	MissingData
Information regarding lifestyle and physical activity is not available for assessment of biochemical results.	MissingData
Unfortunately, information regarding lifestyle, fitness and physical activity is not available to assess biochemical results.	MissingData
Unfortunately, information regarding lifestyle and physical activity were not available to us for the assessment of the biochemical results.	MissingData
Information regarding lifestyle, such as knowledge of physical activity, is not available for assessment of the biochemical results.	Generalization
Information regarding lifestyle and physical activity were not available for assessment of biochemical results.	Blinding
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret than ordinal designs.	Blinding
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret.	Randomization
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret than covariate designs.	StudyDesign
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret.	Randomization
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret.	MissingData
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret.	Randomization
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret.	Blinding
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret.	MissingData
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret.	Blinding
Factorial designs are less easy to interpret.	MissingData
Secondly, the fact that another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute beneficial effects solely to the intervention.	Blinding
Because another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute these beneficial effects solely to intervention.	Blinding
The lack of another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute beneficial effects solely to the intervention.	Control
Another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute beneficial effects solely to the intervention.	Blinding
The absence of another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute the beneficial effects solely to the intervention.	Control
The lack of another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute these beneficial effects solely to the intervention.	Control
However, having another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute beneficial effects solely to the intervention.	MissingData
Thus, it would be difficult to attribute such beneficial effects solely to the intervention. Adding another control comparator makes this difficult.	Control
Because another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute the beneficial effects solely to the intervention, this was not possible.	Control
The absence of another control comparator makes it difficult to attribute beneficial effects solely to the intervention.	Control
We measured the expectancy of receiving a placebo effect in the sample and group psychosocial interactions.	StudyDuration
We measured group psychosocial interactions between the people receiving and anticipating the effects of placebo effects.	Control
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of placebo effects in the group psychosocial interactions between people who received the drugs and the expectancy that they would be received.	Blinding
We also measured group psychosocial interactions and expectancy of receiving and receiving.	Blinding
The amount of placebo effects that were measured in this study is not really meaningful because we have not measured group psychosocial interactions between patients receiving treatment and expectancy of their results.	MissingData
We did not measure group psychosocial interactions or placebo effects; however, we do measure the expectation for receiving this therapy.	Control
We measured group psychosocial interactions and expected response to receiving the placebo effect.	StudyDesign
Moreover, we measured group psychosocial interactions, expectancy and placebo effects.	Blinding
We did not measure group psychosocial interactions and expectancy of receiving the placebo.	Blinding
We did not measure placebo effects as this is in contrast to group psychosocial interactions and expectancy of receiving treatment.	Blinding
One study limitation is the use of a non-randomized control group.	Blinding
One study limitation was the use of a non-randomized control group.	Control
One study limitation is the use of a non-randomized control group.	Control
One study limitation was the use of a non-randomized control group.	StudyDesign
One study limitation is the use of a non-randomized control group.	StudyDesign
One study limitation was the non-randomization of the control group.	Randomization
One study limitation was the use of a non-randomized control group, although we did not compare n n between groups (Table 4).	StudyDesign
One study limitation is the use of a non-randomized control group.	MissingData
One study limitation was the use of a non-randomized control group.	MissingData
One study limitation is the use of a nonrandomized control group.	Randomization
The effect of lowering cholesterol may have caused some adverse effects to emerge over a longer term follow-up.	MissingData
In our previous study, adverse effects of lowering cholesterol on the liver and brain were found only after longer term follow up (Figure 3.2).	Generalization
Therefore, a greater likelihood of adverse effects (such as the onset of weight gain, a reduction in body fat), lowering cholesterol, was not observed during a longer term follow-up, which might have been caused by the lowering cholesterol dose.	MissingData
While adverse effects of lowering cholesterol did not emerge until longer term follow-up, they may have been caused by this treatment.	MissingData
Because the lowering cholesterol alone does not cure obesity, some adverse effects from the treatment may emerge in longer term follow up.	StudyDuration
Although it is possible that lowering cholesterol caused adverse effects, they do not emerge with longer term follow-up, but it is uncertain if they will emerge in later studies.	StudyDuration
Because lowering cholesterol caused adverse effects to emerge, it may have been better to do longer term follow up to detect such effects.	MissingData
Increasing the intake of lowering cholesterol may cause adverse effects to emerge and this may only emerge after longer term follow-up.	MissingData
In this study adverse effects of lowering cholesterol may be caused by the use of oral contraceptives.	MissingData
In the present trial, lowering cholesterol caused the onset of irritable bowel syndrome, which in turn caused adverse effects on the cardiovascular system. But in a longer term follow-up, it may have been caused by a side effect caused by lowering cholesterol.	Blinding
Although participants inevitably knew their allocations to interventions, interviewers and questionnaire respondents did not keep that information in mind at the time of the interviews.	MissingData
Although participants inevitably knew their allocations, interviewers and the study coordinators did not explain how the interventions are allocated.	MissingData
Interviewers and participants were not allocated to interventions, although participants inevitably knew about allocations.	MissingData
Although participants inevitably knew their allocations, interviewers and interviewers did not make a decision about interventions, it is not clear whether this was a meaningful reason for randomisation, and whether the interviews were not meaningful to participants.	Blinding
Although participants inevitably knew their allocations, interviewers knew that they would be given a placebo, they never knew whether a placebo would be appropriate.	Blinding
Although participants inevitably knew the allocations and interviewers were unaware of them, they knew that interviewers had a greater understanding of participants’ intentions.	Blinding
Although participants inevitably knew their allocations, interviewers never knew of these interventions until they arrived at the office.	Blinding
Although participants inevitably knew their allocations, interviewers did not know about it.	Blinding
Statistical Analysis Although participants inevitably knew their allocations, interviewers never asked participants to name which interventions they would receive.	Blinding
In addition to the interviewers, although participants inevitably knew their allocations, we do not know whether they are aware of how these interventions will affect them.	Blinding
Therefore may represent a smaller ‘dose’ for the positive condition, as control condition contained many active components.	Control
The control condition contained many active components, and therefore may have represented a smaller ‘dose’ of the positive condition.	Control
The control condition contained many active components and therefore may have represented a smaller ‘dose’ of the positive condition.	MissingData
The control condition contained many active components and therefore may represent a smaller ‘dose’ of the positive condition.	Control
The control condition contained many active components, therefore may have represented a smaller ‘dose’ of a positive condition.	MissingData
Therefore may not have represented the full potential of the positive condition but it contained many active components and may therefore have represented a smaller ‘dose’ of the positive condition.	Control
Therefore may have represented a smaller ‘dose’ of the positive condition while the control condition contained many active components and therefore may have represented a smaller ‘dose’ of the positive condition.	Control
The positive condition contained many active components, and therefore may have represented a smaller ‘dose’ of the control condition.	Control
The positive condition contained many active components, and therefore may have represented a smaller ‘dose’ of the control condition.	Control
The control condition contained many active components and therefore may represent a smaller ‘dose’ of the positive condition.	Blinding
This impression is strengthened by the significantly higher proportion of participants in the intensive arm who experienced practical difficulty during their time in the intensive arm.	Randomization
However, there was a significantly higher proportion of participants who had practical difficulty, which is an impression that participants did not understand the intensive arm.	Generalization
Nevertheless, we get the impression that there is a significantly higher proportion of participants in the intensive arm who experienced practical difficulty and therefore a negative impression of participation.	MissingData
In addition to practical difficulty, participants in the intensive arm had a significantly higher proportion of participants who found the intensive arm practical difficulty.	MissingData
This impression is attributed to a significantly higher proportion of participants in the intensive arm, but to practical difficulty – the latter being a significant higher proportion of participants in the intensive arm.	MissingData
Due to practical difficulty and a significantly higher proportion of participants in the intensive arm, we had an impression that the effects of the intensive arm were more intense but it was not obvious why.	MissingData
Unfortunately, a significant higher proportion of participants in the intensive arm were missing in the study due to practical difficulty in finding a volunteer.	MissingData
Due to practical difficulty and the significantly higher proportion of participants in the intensive arm, this impression could not be established.	MissingData
Due to practical difficulty in the intensive arm, our impression is that participants had a significantly higher proportion of practical difficulty.	MissingData
While the proportion of participants who participated in the intensive arm was high, we had an impression that practical difficulty in registering participants was a factor.	MissingData
Because the significant difference in LVM could be due to chance due to multiple hypothesis testing in several secondary outcomes.	MissingData
The significant difference between the LVM could have been due to chance due to the small sample size and multiple hypothesis testing in several secondary outcomes.	MissingData
The significant difference between LVM and LVM could be due to chance due to multi-hypothesis testing.	MissingData
The significant difference in LVM could be due to chance due to multiple hypothesis testing, which is a prerequisite for the sensitivity of our analysis.	Blinding
Due to multiple hypothesis testing, we did not observe a significant difference in LVM could have been due to chance due to the low sample size in the study.	MissingData
Because of the significant difference between the LVM could be due to chance due to multiple hypothesis testing, we failed to test several secondary outcomes, whereas the CQM had not been significant due to singleton-difference test.	Randomization
Because of several secondary outcomes, such as LVM could have been a result of chance due to the lack of multiple hypothesis testing.	MissingData
The LVM could be due to chance due to multiple hypothesis testing in several secondary outcomes.	Blinding
The significant difference in chance due to the LVM could be due to several secondary outcomes or due to multiple hypothesis testing.	MissingData
The significant difference in LVM could be due to chance due to the presence of several secondary outcomes, and multiple hypothesis testing was not used.	Randomization
The result needs to be interpreted cautiously because it was not prespecified in the interaction test.	MissingData
Therefore, the interaction test result needs to be interpreted cautiously as the significant difference was not prespecified.	MissingData
The result needs to be interpreted cautiously since the interaction test was significant but not prespecified.	StudyDuration
Because the interaction test is prespecified, the result needs to be interpreted cautiously.	MissingData
In contrast to the interaction test, the result needs to be interpreted cautiously because it was significant in the interaction test.	MissingData
This result needs to be interpreted cautiously as it was not prespecified.	Blinding
The result needs to be interpreted cautiously as significant in the interaction test.	StudyDesign
The interaction test result needs to be interpreted cautiously because it is prespecified and that no significant differences were found between the independent and interaction tests.	MissingData
The result needs to be interpreted cautiously, as it was not prespecified in the interaction test.	MissingData
The result needs to be interpreted cautiously as it was not prespecified.	Blinding
The adverse trend, although 11 years might still emerge fully, has been observed in other trials although 11 years might still be too long to be linked to deleterious effects on treatment and clinical outcome.	Blinding
Although 11 years might still be the time when deleterious effects emerge fully, we do not see any adverse trend in follow-up, or any adverse trend in evaluative variables, during our trial follow-up.	StudyDuration
Although 11 years might still be enough to emerge fully any adverse trend in the effects of the study, no detectable deleterious effects on the study population are expected to emerge fully over this long trial follow-up.	MissingData
Although 11 years might still be a long time for adverse trends to emerge fully in the clinical outcome of our trial, there was no evidence of a clinical trial follow-up at all, which suggests that deleterious effects did not emerge fully in our results at trial follow-up.	Control
Although 11 years might still be a long time, the adverse trend of deleterious effects on the health status during the trial might still emerge fully in the course of follow-up.	MissingData
Although 11 years might still be sufficient to allow for adverse trends to emerge fully during trial follow up, no significant evidence for deleterious effects in these trials has emerged fully during this time period.	MissingData
Therefore, although 11 years might still be a long time to emerge fully, any adverse trend in trial follow-up might emerge fully.	StudyDuration
Nevertheless, although 11 years might still be longer than in most clinical trials, this adverse trend in the initiation of adverse effects has not emerged fully.	Control
The adverse trend for side effects may not have emerged fully during the trial follow-up period although 11 years might still be important to ensure that deleterious effects did not emerge fully.	Blinding
Although 11 years might still be too long for deleterious effects to emerge fully after a study, we did not see an adverse trend within our trial after 16 years.	MissingData
Furthermore, patients who entered the Romana 2 trials entered the extension study.	Blinding
Additionally, not all patients who completed the Romana 2 trials entered the Rome 3 extension study.	MissingData
Furthermore, only a third of patients in the RINA 2 trials entered the RINA 3 extension study, which was completed by 69 percent of the patients.	MissingData
Furthermore, a proportion of patients who completed the second and third RINA 2 trials entered the RINA 3 extension study, so these results may not reflect the full effect on patients.	MissingData
Furthermore, not all patients who completed the Rome 3 extension study or the Romana 2 trials entered in the study.	MissingData
Furthermore, not all patients who completed the Roma 2 trials entered the Roma 3 extension study, so they may not have been eligible for all 6 cohorts of the study.	MissingData
Additionally, patients who completed both the Roma 2 trials entered the Rome 3 extension study and the RINA 1 trial and have completed the RINA 2 trials entered the study.	MissingData
Furthermore, only patients who completed the Romana 2 trials entered the ROMANA 3 extension study.	Blinding
Furthermore, the vast majority of patients who completed the RINA 2 trials entered the RINA 3 extension study.	MissingData
Furthermore, not all patients who completed the RINA 2 trials entered into the RINA 3 extension study.	MissingData
The reported findings relate to a specific trial and therefore may not be generalized and may not apply to a specific population.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to this specific trial and hence may not be generalized.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to this specific trial and hence may be more generalized, as the findings relate to a specific population.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to a specific trial and hence may not be generalized, but may be generalized to a specific population.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to a specific trial and hence may not be generalized to a specific population.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to a specific trial and hence may not be generalized to a specific population.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to a specific trial in a specific population and hence may not be generalized.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to a specific trial and thus may not be generalized to a specific population.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to a specific trial and a specific population, and hence may not be generalized.	Generalization
The reported findings relate to a specific trial and therefore may not be generalized to a specific population.	Generalization
Missing rates of step data varied between the trial arm and control group, with the latter rate being highest among the trial arms.	MissingData
The missing rates of step data varied within the trial arm, but were highest among the control group.	MissingData
In the trial arm, missing rates of step data varied, and were highest among the control group.	MissingData
Missing rates in the trial arm were highest among the control group, but missing rates in step data varied.	MissingData
Missing rates for step data varied widely in the trial arm, but they were highest among the control group.	MissingData
The missing rates for step data varied greatly by trial arm with the highest among the control group.	MissingData
Missing rates in step data varied widely by trial arm with the highest among the control group.	MissingData
Missing rates among trial arms are highest among the control group, and those for step data varied significantly over time.	MissingData
The missing rates for step data varied across trial arms, with missing rates highest among the control group.	MissingData
Because missing rates for step data varied between control and trial arms, the rate in the trial arm was highest among the control group.	MissingData
Treatment assignment will affect outcomes, but participant expectations will affect outcomes.	Blinding
Effect Treatment assignment may affect outcomes due to participant expectations about treatment effects.	Blinding
Using this method, participants are required to indicate treatment assignment in order to affect outcomes, and treatment assignment affects expectations about the effects on participants.	MissingData
However, it is unclear whether participant expectations affect outcomes, and that treatment assignment does not affect outcomes, or whether treatment assignment does not affect outcomes.	Control
Treatment assignment will affect outcomes and participants’ expectations of how treatment affects outcomes.	MissingData
In fact, treatment assignment has been shown to affect outcomes, but participant expectations have not been clearly quantified.	Control
Participants’ treatment assignment may affect outcomes if participant expectations about the outcome and their treatment are not high enough to assess treatment effectiveness.	MissingData
Participants’ participant expectations affect outcomes and affect the effects of treatment assignment on their outcomes.	MissingData
The treatment assignment did not affect outcomes but participants’ participant expectations did affect outcomes.	StudyDesign
Participants' participant expectations affect outcomes by treatment assignment.	Generalization
Tranexamic acid may have improved ischaemic lesions, but in patients allocated to stable circulation there was no observed reduction in ischaemic lesions.	Control
Tranexamic acid may have caused stable circulation in those patients allocated to tranexamic acid, hence the observed reduction in ischaemic lesions.	StudyDuration
Tranexamic acid may have contributed to the observed reduction in the number of patients allocated to receive tranexamic acid, resulting in a more stable circulation in patients with ischaemic lesions.	Control
Tranexamic acid may have influenced the observed reduction in ischaemic lesions in patients allocated to stable circulation.	Control
Tranexamic acid may have been a factor contributing to the observed reduction in ischaemic lesions in patients allocated to stable circulation.	MissingData
Tranexamic acid may have increased the stability of the patients' circulation and observed reduction in the incidence of ischaemic lesions, with patients allocated to tranexamic acid receiving an upper dose of the drug.	Blinding
Therefore, the observed reduction in ischaemic lesions in patients allocated to tranexamic acid may not be due to the fact that the drug has not yet had an effect on stable circulation and stable circulation.	Control
Tranexamic acid may have caused the observed reduction in ischaemic lesions in patients allocated to this drug.	MissingData
Tranexamic acid may have led to the observed reduction in ischaemic lesions in patients allocated to the study.	MissingData
Tranexamic acid may have reduced ischaemic lesions in patients allocated to tranexamic acid, due to the observed reduction in stable circulation.	Blinding
Having used a doubleblind technique, administration devices would be readily distinguishable, resulting in increased complexity of the study.	Blinding
In this case, a doubleblind study would require administration devices which are readily distinguishable from dummy devices due to increased complexity.	Blinding
Having a doubleblind study would have increased complexity and made administration devices more readily distinguishable.	Control
Moreover, we would have required doubleblind study to be readily distinguishable between the administration devices.	Blinding
As a result, doubleblind study would have been more difficult in the first two days because administration devices are readily distinguishable.	Blinding
For the doubleblind study would have been an unnecessary measure of increased complexity and increased difficulty in constructing and administering devices, since the two devices are readily distinguishable, in which the tamponadministration devices are used.	Blinding
Ultimately, however, a doubleblind study would not be readily distinguishable from a dummy technique, which could have added increased complexity to the administration devices.	Blinding
Therefore, a doubleblind study would be required to ensure that administration devices are readily distinguishable from their human counterparts, resulting in an increased complexity in the design of the study.	Blinding
In addition to increased complexity, a doubleblind study would not be readily distinguishable from a singledummy technique or doubleadministration devices due to increased complexity.	Blinding
To be consistent with the literature, a doubleblind study would require two administration devices, which would be readily distinguishable with one another.	Blinding
Thus, the absence of masking in the absence of the assessment of events within 7 days is relevant.	Blinding
In the absence of masking, it is relevant to assess the effects of masking on events within 7 days.	Blinding
In the absence of masking, it would be relevant to assess the timing of the events within 7 days.	MissingData
Therefore, masking was not relevant to our assessment of events within 7 days.	Blinding
This is particularly relevant because it is important to assess events within 7 days of masking.	Blinding
Masking is relevant for the assessment of events within 7 days.	MissingData
Masking is irrelevant to our assessment of events within 7 days, because it was not an absence of events within 7 days.	Blinding
In the absence of masking, it may be relevant to assess events within 7 days.	Blinding
Masking is relevant in the absence of events within 7 days of the appointment and should not be a barrier to our assessment of those events.	Blinding
Therefore, masking, in the absence of events within 7 days, is relevant to the assessment of those events.	Blinding
Furthermore, given the exploratory nature of the feasibility study, we were not able to determine multiple outcomes.	StudyDuration
Furthermore, due to the exploratory nature of this feasibility study, the sample size calculation will be a supplementary one for multiple outcomes.	StudyDesign
Furthermore, because of the exploratory nature of this study, sample size calculation was required to ensure multiple outcomes.	Control
Furthermore, given the exploratory nature of this feasibility study, it is more difficult to make multiple outcomes from this study.	MissingData
Furthermore, given the exploratory nature of the feasibility study, sample size calculation is disproportionate to the multiple outcomes.	MissingData
Furthermore, due to the exploratory nature of the feasibility study, we did not perform a sample size calculation on multiple outcomes.	Blinding
Furthermore, due to the exploratory nature of the feasibility study, multiple outcomes and sample size calculation were not expected.	MissingData
Additionally, due to the exploratory nature of the feasibility study, the sample size calculation is not yet complete.	Generalization
Furthermore, due to the exploratory nature of our feasibility study, we have not reported multiple outcomes and we have not had a chance to conduct a sample size calculation.	StudyDuration
Secondly, given the exploratory nature of our feasibility study, we were not able to use multiple outcomes, and our sample size calculation was based on multiple outcomes.	MissingData
This treatment site was not sufficiently randomised for disorganised dimension of client satisfaction and there was substantial attrition bias.	MissingData
However, we believe this sample size is insufficient to account for the disorganised dimension of client satisfaction at the treatment site and we expect substantial attrition bias.	MissingData
As we did not have sufficient time to investigate a treatment site, disorganised dimension and clients satisfaction, we are particularly concerned with the substantial attrition bias.	StudyDesign
Although disorganised dimension of the treatment site was sufficient, substantial attrition bias was still significant.	StudyDuration
We did not use a disorganised dimension as the primary outcome and we had substantial attrition bias because of the disorganised dimension of the treatment site.	Control
The disorganised dimension of client satisfaction was not sufficiently addressed by the trial to be sufficient to overcome substantial attrition bias.	MissingData
A disorganised dimension of patient satisfaction is not sufficient to explain substantial attrition bias and significant attrition in the overall patient-report ratio (CPRS) among those who were treated at a single treatment site.	Control
Because of the disorganised dimension, there was substantial attrition bias and there was significant reduction in client satisfaction across treatment sites.	MissingData
Despite the disorganised dimension, client satisfaction was sufficiently high at the treatment site in this study, so it is likely that substantial attrition bias occurs.	MissingData
Given that the disorganised dimension of the trial was insufficient to determine client satisfaction, substantial attrition bias in the design may have caused a substantial attrition bias.	MissingData
The effect first noticeable in the larger initial weight loss cohort was noted at the 2nd follow-up, suggesting that the longer follow-up time period may have caused the effect first noticeable.	Blinding
Due to the lack of control, the TAT effect first noticed in the first year of follow-up (and this effect in the longer follow-up period may be less obvious in the second year of follow-up) than in the first study.	MissingData
Because the higher initial weight loss (at effect) was seen at a longer follow-up, it is also possible that the effect first noticeable at a longer follow-up time period may be because of a longer follow-up.	Randomization
Given the lower initial weight loss, a longer follow-up time period may make the TA effect first noticeable after a longer follow-up period.	StudyDuration
The shorter follow-up, allowing us to see the effect first noticeable, along with a higher initial weight loss (Tat effect) after a shorter time period, may have helped with the slower effect first noticeable.	MissingData
However, this longer follow-up period may explain why TAT effect first noticed at 1 year and higher initial weight loss at 7 years.	Randomization
A longer follow-up may be necessary, as longer follow-up could reduce the effect first noticeable after higher initial weight loss.	MissingData
Thus, a longer follow-up period may be needed to see the effect first noticeable after higher initial weight loss, but this effect is not yet evident after the first year of study.	MissingData
In some studies, the TAT effect first noticeable after a longer follow up, although the resulting higher initial weight loss was only seen after a longer follow-up, which could explain why the effect first noticeable at the first follow-up.	MissingData
Thus, a longer follow-up period may have reduced the rat effect, making this effect first noticeable in the ED study with higher initial weight loss after one year of follow-up.	MissingData
However, this trial was performed at a single center.	Blinding
The study was performed in a single center.	Control
In this study, only one center, VINDICATE, was performed.	StudyDuration
A single center study in vindicate was not performed.	MissingData
As the treatment was performed at a single center, there was a chance that the analysis was not properly designed for the population.	MissingData
Vindicate was performed in a single center.	MissingData
VINDICATE was performed at a single center.	MissingData
A single center trial was not performed in which vindicate was performed.	MissingData
VINDICATE was performed in a single center.	Blinding
Vindicate was performed in a single center.	MissingData
The use of HbA levels as an efficacy endpoint with a short duration precluded change in HbA levels.	MissingData
The use of HbA levels as an efficacy endpoint is likely because of the short duration precluded change of HbA levels.	Control
The use of the efficacy endpoint, which involves the change of HbA levels, was therefore not necessary.	MissingData
The use of a short duration precluded the change in HbA levels as the efficacy endpoint.	Control
The use of short duration precluded the use of an efficacy endpoint, HBA levels, which are the only time a change has occurred.	StudyDuration
The short duration precluded the use of this endpoint as an efficacy endpoint.	Control
Unfortunately, the short duration precluded the use of Hba levels as an efficacy endpoint.	StudyDesign
The short duration precluded use of this endpoint to monitor HbA levels.	MissingData
The short duration precluded use of this efficacy endpoint in this study.	Control
The short duration precluded the use of this efficacy endpoint in a blinded study, and the use of a single time point to control hba levels.	Blinding
In addition, it is possible that neither drug could be effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum in the third-arm treatment arm.	Blinding
Although neither drug was effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum, its possible that either drug is effective in the treatment third arm.	MissingData
It is possible that neither drug in the treatment third arm was effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum.	Control
Therefore, it is possible that neither drug is effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum in the third arm of the treatment.	Blinding
Due to our lack of experience, it is possible that neither drug in the treatment third arm was effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum.	Control
Unfortunately, neither drug in the treatment third arm was effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum; hence, it is not possible to have tested whether the first two drugs in the trial were effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum.	Blinding
Thus, it may be possible that neither drug was effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum in the treatment third arm.	Control
In addition, it was not possible to control the dose for a treatment third arm in this study. Moreover, neither drug was effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum in our study.	Blinding
It is possible that neither drug in our treatment third arm was effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum.	Control
It may have been possible to have a treatment third arm that was effective in treating pyoderma gangrenosum but neither drug is effective in treating this condition.	Control
The placebo group was not examined to determine baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection.	MissingData
We also did not examine baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection in the placebo group.	Blinding
We also examined the baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection in the placebo group in order to determine the baseline incidence.	Blinding
None. The baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection was not examined in the placebo group.	Control
We also did not examine the baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection in the placebo group to determine baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection.	Blinding
We did not examine the baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection in the placebo group.	MissingData
In order to examine the baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection in the placebo group, no pre-treatment or post-treatment questionnaire was mailed to patients in the placebo group.	Blinding
We examined the baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection in the placebo group but did not examine the baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection in the placebo group.	MissingData
In this study we did not examine the baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection or pain following propofol injection in the placebo group.	Blinding
In addition, we did not examine the baseline incidence of pain following propofol injection in the placebo group to determine the baseline incidence of pain.	Blinding
Despite the resulting difficulties, it is interesting to collect precise information about daily physical activity time during structured physical activity implementation, as it would allow us to more precisely assess the effects on our analyses.	StudyDesign
This makes it interesting to collect precise information about daily physical activity time so that it can be used for analyses of structured physical activity implementation.	MissingData
Because of the difficulty of collecting precise information about the daily physical activity time and structured physical activity implementation, it would have been interesting to collect precise information on structured physical activity implementation during the analysis.	MissingData
Because of the complexity of structured physical activity implementation, it would have been interesting to collect precise information on daily physical activity time and to perform analyses based on structured physical activity implementation.	MissingData
In addition to capturing and collecting precise information about daily physical activity time, it is interesting to conduct systematic physical activity implementation analyses.	StudyDesign
It is interesting to collect precise information about structured physical activity implementation, such as daily physical activity time.	MissingData
It was interesting to collect precise information about daily physical activity time in structured physical activity implementation for our analyses.	StudyDuration
It would be interesting to collect precise information about the daily physical activity time and the structured physical activity implementation to better inform these analyses.	MissingData
It is interesting to collect precise information about the daily physical activity time and structured physical activity implementation.	StudyDuration
It would be interesting to collect precise information about structured physical activity implementation, for example, daily physical activity time.	StudyDesign
This makes generalization of current findings to other “real-world” clinical settings indistinct (Biederman et al., 2006).	MissingData
This makes generalization to other “real-world” clinical settings indistinct (Bierman et al., 2006).	Blinding
This makes generalization of the current findings in “real-world” clinical settings indistinct (Biederman et al., 2006).	Control
This makes generalization of our current findings in other “real-world” clinical settings indistinct (Biederman et al., 2006).	Generalization
This makes generalization of our current findings to other “real-world” clinical settings indistinct (Biederman et al., 2006).	MissingData
This makes generalization of the current findings to other “real-world” clinical settings indistinct (Biederman et al., 2006).	Generalization
The fact that medication exposure rates in these patients were reported in various “real-world” clinical settings makes generalization to other “real-world” settings indistinct (Bierman et al., 2006).	Control
The fact that medication exposure rates were not measured in “real-world” clinical settings makes generalization of the current findings in this study and the results obtained in this study in those contexts indistinct (Biederman et al., 2006).	Generalization
This makes generalization to other “real-world” clinical settings indistinct (Bierman et al., 2006).	MissingData
This makes generalization of the current findings to other “real-world” clinical settings indistinct (Biederman et al., 2006).	Generalization
The applicability of the findings outside the research context is not tested. The vimove system is a device designed to encourage self-education approaches to movement (Vimove).	Generalization
We are not able to determine the applicability of our results outside of our research context or to education approaches in the VIMOVE system.	Generalization
This is a serious problem as it affects our broader understanding of our current and future work in the field of education approaches and the applicability of the results outside our research context.	MissingData
There are also significant implications for the applicability of the results outside of the research context of the vimove system and other self-education approaches.	Generalization
It is difficult to assess the applicability of these results outside of the research context, given that the Vimove system and education approaches were designed for a child’s earliest years.	MissingData
The viMove system, a system of self-education approaches, was used to build up the community of adolescent athletes. I am interested in the applicability of these results outside of the research context.	MissingData
The viMove system is intended for people with a disability and the applicability of some of the results outside of this research context is not yet known.	MissingData
Third, we do not consider the applicability of the results outside of the research context, because we are only testing the vimove system, so we cannot assess the applicability of the results outside of the research context.	Control
The applicability of these results outside of the research context will depend on the context and the context-specificity of the VIMove system and of the implementation of the education approaches.	Generalization
The applicability of the results outside of the research context may depend on the nature of the education approaches used in the vimove system.	Blinding
There are longer-term positive effects with calcium supplement use but it may be more difficult to confirm the long-term positive effects with ongoing calcium supplement use.	StudyDuration
A longer-term follow-up study is needed to confirm the long-lasting positive effects of ongoing calcium supplement use.	MissingData
Longer-term follow-up is necessary to confirm the long-lasting positive effects of ongoing calcium supplement use.	StudyDuration
Long-term follow-up is required to confirm the longer-lasting positive effects of ongoing calcium supplement use.	Blinding
Longer-term follow-up is needed to confirm and/or confirm lasting positive effects of ongoing calcium supplement use on bone health.	StudyDesign
Longer-term follow-up was required to confirm the long-lasting positive effects of ongoing calcium supplement use.	MissingData
Longer-term follow-up allows us to confirm any longer-lasting positive effects of ongoing calcium supplement use.	StudyDuration
Longer-term follow-up is needed to confirm and sustain long-lasting positive effects of calcium supplement use.	StudyDesign
Longer-term follow-up is required to confirm the long-lasting positive effects of ongoing calcium supplement use.	StudyDuration
Longer-term follow up is necessary to confirm longer-lasting positive effects of calcium supplement use.	MissingData
This limitation of a certain intervention in this study was also a practical issue and dropouts could be a limitation.	MissingData
Due to practical issues, dropouts could have been higher in a certain intervention (which is also a limitation of the present study).	MissingData
Because of a limitation of the study design and practical issues, dropouts could be an important limitation.	StudyDuration
Another limitation of this study was that the dropouts could be limited by practical issues and the lack of motivation to participate in certain intervention.	StudyDesign
However, the dropouts could have been limited by practical issues and the motivation to be part of a certain intervention.	Generalization
Because this was a very specific and specific intervention, dropouts could have been due to practical issues and to the lack of motivation for a certain intervention.	Control
Moreover, the limited nature of certain intervention and practical issues of dropouts could be attributed to its limitation.	StudyDesign
Lastly, the limitation of a certain intervention is based on practical issues, such as the motivation of dropouts.	MissingData
Because of the limitations of this study, dropouts could be a practical issue because there is no motivation for a certain intervention.	Generalization
Our study has a limitation of practical issues, such as lack of motivation for participation in certain intervention or dropouts could be a limitation.	Control
Because the study progressed so quickly, the resulting data could not be analyzed.	Generalization
Because the study progressed so fast, we did not have time to analyze the resulting data.	Blinding
Considering that the study progressed so quickly, it is difficult to analyze the resulting data.	Control
The study progressed so fast that little of its resulting data could be analyzed.	MissingData
Because the study progressed so quickly, the resulting data can only be analyzed at an early stage.	StudyDuration
Because the study progressed so fast, we analyzed the resulting data too soon.	MissingData
Because the study progressed so quickly, we analyzed a limited number of the resulting data.	Generalization
Because the study progressed so quickly, the resulting data could not be analyzed.	MissingData
Since the study progressed so fast, it is difficult to analyze the resulting data.	MissingData
Since the study progressed so fast, we could not analyzed all resulting data.	Control
Differences in the time represent a limitation; they do not account for patient discontinuations or symptom levels.	StudyDuration
Differences in time represent a limitation in our database, and so differences in patient discontinuations may not be as important.	Generalization
Differences in patient discontinuations over time represent an additional limitation.	Blinding
In addition to these differences in time represent a limitation in patient discontinuations.	Control
Differences in time represent a limitation, and so we assume that differences in time represent a limitation.	MissingData
Differences in patient discontinuations over time represent a limitation of our ability to understand and analyze the patient’s progress.	MissingData
The differences in patient discontinuations over time represent a limitation.	MissingData
Differences in time represent a limitation.	Blinding
The limitations in time represent in part a limitation of the patient discontinuations.	Blinding
Differences in time represent a limitation in the number of patients.	Blinding
Randomization Using a randomized design in the intervention package may have introduced bias in the outcome assessment.	Control
Due to the randomized design, the intervention package was presented to study participants prior to outcome assessment and this may have introduced bias in the outcome assessment.	MissingData
The randomization of the intervention package and outcome assessment could have introduced bias as there were only study participants in the intervention package, and in the outcome assessment.	Blinding
In addition to the randomized design, the outcome assessment was designed to assess the effectiveness of the intervention package and study participants.	StudyDesign
The randomized design introduced bias in the intervention package and outcome assessment, and it did not allow for the initiation of an additional intervention requiring study participants to participate in outcome assessment.	Blinding
Because of the randomized design of our intervention package, we were concerned that this might introduce bias in outcome assessment.	Blinding
We suspect that the randomized design introduced bias to outcome assessment because the intervention package was not given to all study participants.	StudyDuration
The randomized design of the intervention package introduced bias to outcome assessment in the study participants.	Randomization
The randomized design of the intervention package and outcome assessment introduced bias to the findings, especially when adjusting for the number of study participants and study duration.	Blinding
This randomized design introduced bias to the outcome assessment by study participants.	Randomization
Our results may not necessarily be generalizable to other countries or facility settings.	Generalization
The results may not necessarily be generalizable to other countries or facility settings.	Generalization
The results may not necessarily be generalizable across countries and facility settings.	Generalization
The results may not necessarily be generalizable to other countries or facility settings.	Generalization
The results may not necessarily be generalizable to all countries and facility settings.	Generalization
Because our results may not necessarily be generalizable across countries or facility settings, they may not be generalizable across different facilities.	Generalization
Therefore, these results may not necessarily be generalizable to other countries or facility settings.	Generalization
The results may not necessarily be generalizable across countries, facility settings, or even facilities.	Generalization
These results may not necessarily be generalizable to other countries or facility settings.	Generalization
The results may not necessarily be generalizable to all facilities and in all countries.	Generalization
We reviewed electronic medical records and attempted to contact 70 % of enrolled patients for assessment of the secondary outcome.	MissingData
The Investigator reviewed electronic medical records and attempted to contact 70 % of enrolled patients for assessment of secondary outcome.	MissingData
We reviewed electronic medical records of enrolled patients, but only reached 70 % for assessment and assessment of secondary outcome.	Blinding
Although we reviewed electronic medical records, we did not contact 70 enrolled patients to assess their secondary outcome.	MissingData
We reviewed electronic medical records and attempted to contact 70 enrolled patients for assessment of the secondary outcome.	Blinding
Of our enrolled patients, we reviewed electronic medical records and contacted 70 of them for assessment of this secondary outcome.	Blinding
We did not review electronic medical records in our study and were unable to contact 70 enrolled patients for assessment of this secondary outcome.	MissingData
We reviewed electronic medical records and were able to contact 70 % of enrolled patients for assessment of secondary outcome.	Control
We reviewed electronic medical records and were able to contact 70 of the enrolled patients for assessment of the secondary outcome.	MissingData
We reviewed electronic medical records of enrolled patients, but we were not able to contact 70 of them for assessment of the secondary outcome.	Control
Furthermore, because we used different delivery systems (i.e., oral, transdermal), it was particularly difficult to control for these complications in a double-blind study.	Blinding
It is particularly difficult to determine how different delivery systems are used (i.e., oral and transdermal).	Blinding
This was particularly difficult to perform in a double blind study as different delivery systems (i.e., oral, transdermal) were used.	Blinding
This is especially difficult in a single-blind study because different delivery systems (e.g., oral, transdermal, or the oral form) are used.	Blinding
Because this was a double-blind study, it was particularly difficult to compare the different delivery systems (i.e., oral and transdermal).	Blinding
It was especially difficult to compare different delivery systems (i.e., transdermal, oral).	Blinding
The double-blind study was particularly difficult because different delivery systems (i.e., transdermal, oral, etc) were used.	Blinding
Because the same drugs were used for different delivery systems (i.e., oral, transdermal and oral, oral and transdermal) blinding is especially difficult in a single-blind study.	Blinding
Because of the different delivery systems, it was particularly difficult to assess which one was most effective in this blind study, i.e., transdermal and oral.	Blinding
Hence, a double-blind study with different delivery systems (i.e., transdermal, oral, etc.) was particularly difficult to design and interpret, as in this study we did not control for somatostatin-related effects of oral antibiotics.	Blinding
This analysis provides an interesting specific example of how quality improvement interventions like http://www.dd.org/canimpact dental patient behavior.	MissingData
This analysis provides an interesting specific example of how quality improvement interventions like http://www.dts.org/ could impact dental patient behavior.	MissingData
The analysis provides an interesting specific example of the impact dental patient behavior can have on quality improvement interventions like http://www.dentist.ca/ on the clinical practice of dentistry and the potential problems associated with them.	Control
Our analysis provides an interesting specific example of how quality improvement interventions like http://www.tmu.nhs.ca may impact dental patient behavior, with the potential problems of lack of evidence.	Control
This analysis provides an interesting specific example of how quality improvement interventions like http://www.dentalclinics.net/ can impact dental patient behavior, and how they could potentially impact dental patient behavior.	Control
Our analysis provides an interesting specific example of the potential problems of quality improvement interventions like http://www.fems.org/ that could impact dental patient behavior, in which case there might be additional potential problems.	StudyDuration
This analysis provides an interesting specific example of how quality improvement interventions like http://www.dr.uvm.edu can impact dental patient behavior and present potential problems.	StudyDuration
This analysis provides an interesting specific example of the potential problems associated with quality improvement interventions like http://www.dr-doe.de which impact dental patient behavior, but this is unlikely to impact dental patient behavior for all patients.	MissingData
The analysis provides an interesting specific example of how quality improvement interventions like http://www.dentalpatient.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nrt.nr	Generalization
This analysis provides an interesting specific example of how quality improvement interventions like http://www.dac.dk/ can impact dental patient behavior and potentially problems with the use of the interventions.	MissingData
Due to the small number of participants studied, we cannot assess the external validity of the results based on the generalizability to other participants studied with early diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
There was no external validity assessment of generalizability for participants studied with early diabetic kidney disease or with advanced diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
The internal validity of the study may be limited by the small number of participants studied and the lack of generalizability to participants with advanced diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
Assuming the participants studied had early diabetic kidney disease, external validity would be difficult to assess.	Generalization
The researchers had no external validity to our results, as the participants studied in this study all had either early diabetic kidney disease or advanced diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
The study was conducted with 60 participants studied, representing 64% of those with early diabetic kidney disease and 57% of those with advanced diabetic kidney disease. Therefore, the study does not provide external validity for the results because of the low generalizability of our results in participants studied with early diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
We evaluated the generalizability and external validity of the study in the participants studied who did not have early diabetic kidney disease but advanced diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
Given our results, it would be desirable to improve generalizability of the results to participants studied who had advanced diabetic kidney disease and/or had early diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
The results of this study are not directly applicable to all participants studied in this study, such as those with advanced diabetic kidney disease, but they have high internal validity, as they do not provide generalizability to those with early diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
Due to the lack of generalizability, we only studied participants studied with early diabetic kidney disease and advanced diabetic kidney disease.	Generalization
Data were checked patients’ serum magnesium concentrations by masked personnel, and were collected centrally using the clinical records of each hospital.	Blinding
The serum magnesium concentrations were not masked personnel and therefore are not collected centrally as secondary outcome data.	Blinding
Serum magnesium concentrations were collected centrally by unmasked personnel and secondary outcome data were not reported, although the laboratory tests were recorded centrally.	MissingData
Serum magnesium concentrations were obtained by masked personnel and were collected centrally (see below) and secondary outcome data is available in the UK.	Blinding
Serum magnesium concentrations were not checked patients by masked personnel and were not collected centrally for secondary outcome data.	Blinding
Secondary outcome data was not collected centrally by masked personnel when checking patients' serum magnesium concentrations, but was collected centrally by the hospital by masked personnel.	Blinding
Secondary outcome data are collected centrally and masked personnel are responsible for checking patients’ serum magnesium concentrations.	Blinding
These secondary outcome data were collected centrally by masked personnel, and were subsequently checked by masked personnel, to validate the utilisation of serum magnesium concentrations.	MissingData
The serum magnesium concentrations were not collected centrally and were not collected by masked personnel after checking patients’ blood for other blood types or obtaining secondary outcome data.	MissingData
The secondary outcome data collected centrally were not collected by masked personnel after checking patients and were only available to unmasked personnel who checked patients by serum magnesium concentrations.	Blinding
As such, our findings may be generalisable to smaller cities with fewer obese adolescents seen in general health practitioners.	Generalization
These findings may not be generalisable to smaller cities where there are a large number of obese adolescents seen by general health practitioners.	Generalization
Therefore, the findings may not be generalisable to other areas or to adolescents seen in smaller cities, since they were not reported by general health practitioners.	Generalization
These findings may therefore not be generalisable to the more obese adolescents seen in larger cities, as they do not require the services of general health practitioners.	Generalization
Therefore, findings may not be generalisable in smaller cities or to obese adolescents seen by general health practitioners.	Generalization
Our findings may not be generalisable to obese adolescents seen in larger cities, especially those seen in general health practitioners' GP practices.	Generalization
The findings may not be generalisable to more urban areas or to general health practitioners who see overweight or obese adolescents seen by GPs in smaller cities.	Generalization
These findings may not be generalisable in smaller cities, as we did not have enough general health practitioners in the cities.	Generalization
The findings may be generalisable to more obese adolescents seen by general health practitioners in smaller cities.	Generalization
Given our findings may not be generalisable to other cities, or to obese adolescents seen in smaller cities seen by general health practitioners.	Generalization
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after detection of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, which provides an explanation for the probable mechanism that could have led to further delayed outcome assessment.	Control
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after the first aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage and detected later the probable mechanism for its occurrence.	Blinding
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after the onset of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage and detected later in this cohort, which is a probable mechanism for our delayed outcome assessment.	StudyDuration
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after detection of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage (and probably detected later), and therefore it cannot be concluded from the literature a probable mechanism of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage.	Blinding
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after asymptomatic aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage and detected later on, indicating a probable mechanism for the delay in outcome assessment.	MissingData
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, a probable mechanism of delayed outcome assessment, which can be detected later.	StudyDesign
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after thrombosis of the aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage and the probable mechanism was detected later in the course of outcome assessment.	MissingData
Although we measured clinical outcome 3 months after obliteration, a probable mechanism for the failure of outcome assessment is not clear.	MissingData
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after diagnosis of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage, a probable mechanism of failure in outcome assessment.	MissingData
We measured clinical outcome 3 months after aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage for a probable mechanism of underlying recurrences, which were detected later during outcome assessment.	MissingData
Another limitation is the absence of any inoffice BP measurements on trial.	Blinding
Another limitation of the trial was the absence of inoffice BP measurements.	MissingData
Another limitation of this trial is the absence of inoffice BP measurements.	MissingData
Another limitation of the trial is the absence of outofoffice BP measurements.	MissingData
Another limitation was the absence of inoffice bp measurements, and so an absence in a trial is an advantage.	MissingData
Another limitation of the trial was the absence of inoffice BP measurements.	MissingData
Another limitation of the trial is the absence of inoffice BP measurements.	MissingData
Another limitation of the trial is the absence of inoffice BP measurements.	Generalization
Another limitation was the absence of inoffice BP measurements in our trial.	Generalization
Another limitation of this trial is the absence of inoffice BP measurements.	MissingData
Although vancomycin was administered to patients allocated to it, a subtle difference existed in important prognostic variables.	MissingData
Although we did not observe a subtle difference existed between patients allocated to vancomycin and those who were not bacteraemic, there was no sign that vancomycin was associated with any important prognostic variables.	MissingData
A subtle difference existed in the values of important prognostic variables and bacteraemic status between patients allocated to vancomycin and patients allocated to placebo.	MissingData
A subtle difference existed between the patients allocated to vancomycin and patients allocated to another antibacteraemic regimen.	Blinding
A subtle difference existed in some important prognostic variables and in the proportion of bacteraemic patients allocated to vancomycin.	MissingData
A subtle difference existed between patients allocated to vancomycin and patients not bacteraemic, which are important prognostic variables.	MissingData
A subtle difference existed between patients allocated to vancomycin and the other important prognostic variables.	MissingData
In addition, a subtle difference existed between patients allocated to vancomycin and patients allocated to a bacteraemic treatment in relation to important prognostic variables.	Blinding
A subtle difference existed between patients allocated to vancomycin and those who were bacteraemic, thereby influencing important prognostic variables.	Control
Even though a subtle difference existed in important prognostic variables between patients allocated to vancomycin, this small difference did not influence the patient outcomes, as vancomycin is often administered to patients bacteraemic and there are other important prognostic variables which may be important prognostic variables.	MissingData
Lower adherence may also result from the pragmatic design of the trial and the use of an oral contraceptive.	MissingData
The use of a pragmatic design of randomized trials also results in lower adherence may result.	Control
In addition, lower adherence may also result from the pragmatic design of the trial.	Generalization
The pragmatic design of the study and lower adherence may also result from lower adherence.	StudyDuration
Because of the pragmatic design of the study, lower adherence may also result from the use of the drug.	StudyDesign
The pragmatic design of this study and use of a placebo may also result in lower adherence may also result in lower adherence.	StudyDesign
This pragmatic design may also result in lower adherence may also result in poorer data collection.	StudyDesign
The pragmatic design of the trial and lower adherence may also result from the use of the same evaluative strategy.	StudyDesign
In addition to a pragmatic design, lower adherence may also result from the use of anti-psychotics.	Randomization
Due to the pragmatic design of the study, lower adherence may also result from a shorter study length, and therefore more participants are not recruited.	MissingData
Dietary intake recorded in unweighed diaries was poorly related to energy expenditure estimated using the measures for weight gain (14), suggesting that the amount of dietary intake recorded in weighed diaries was not well related to energy expenditure estimated using the measures for weight gain.	Blinding
The dietary intake recorded by the participants in the unweighed diaries were poorly related to energy expenditure estimated using BCA (13/13), suggesting that it may have been too high to be well related to the energy expenditure estimated using the BCA (13/13).	MissingData
Dietary intake recorded in the unweighed diaries was poorly related to energy expenditure estimated using BPA (Table 313), suggesting that dietary intake recorded was not related to energy expenditure estimated using BPA (Table 313).	Blinding
In addition, the dietary intake recorded in unweighed diaries was poorly related to the energy expenditure estimated using the unweighed diary (13), suggesting that the diet in the unweighed diaries may be similar.	MissingData
Dietary intake recorded in unweighed diaries is poorly related to the energy expenditure estimated using the weight of the dietary intake recorded in weight diaries (12).	MissingData
This is important because the dietary intake recorded in unweighed diaries was poorly related to energy expenditure estimated using this method (see Section 13.13).	MissingData
The dietary intake recorded in the unweighed diaries is poorly related to the energy expenditure estimated using the modified Mean Value (NmV) (Figure 13), suggesting that the two measurements are not related.	MissingData
Dietary intake recorded in the unweighed diaries were poorly related to the energy expenditure estimated using this method (14, 13), suggesting that the estimates of energy expenditure are not always in accord with their values.	MissingData
The dietary intake recorded in unweighed diaries was poorly related to the energy expenditure estimated using these diaries (13) (Additional file 3: Table 13).	Generalization
The dietary intake recorded by unweighed diaries was poorly related to energy expenditure estimated using this method (13).	MissingData
Furthermore, participants' group sociodemographic characteristics will not be used to determine route of transmission.	MissingData
Furthermore, we did not monitor participant-level sociodemographic characteristics to determine route of transmission.	MissingData
Additionally, we did not have access to participant-level sociodemographic characteristics to determine route of transmission.	MissingData
Additionally, we did not collect participant-level sociodemographic characteristics in order to determine route of transmission.	MissingData
Additionally, it is not always possible to determine route of transmission based on participant-level sociodemographic characteristics and exposure to disease.	MissingData
Additionally, we will need to determine route and level sociodemographic characteristics of participants for the transmission of the HIV virus to the patients.	MissingData
Additionally, participant-level sociodemographic characteristics did not reveal routes of transmission.	Blinding
Additionally, participants may not be of higher level sociodemographic characteristics, allowing us to determine route of transmission of disease.	MissingData
Additionally, participants-level sociodemographic characteristics do not provide sufficient information to determine route of transmission.	MissingData
Furthermore, it was not possible to determine route of transmission by examining participant-level sociodemographic characteristics.	Generalization
Participants were randomly assigned to the group with severe symptoms or to the randomly selected group, who were prescribed antibiotics immediately after a diagnosis of a severe symptom, but not for baseline symptoms.	Control
The baseline symptoms were the same amongst groups (although in the randomised group patients were prescribed antibiotics immediately after the outbreak).	Randomization
In our randomised group, patients were prescribed antibiotics immediately at baseline symptoms, but the prescribing rate was not measured at baseline. Thus, baseline symptoms are the most common confounder of severe symptoms.	Randomization
Patients in the randomised group were prescribed antibiotics immediately for severe symptoms at baseline.	Blinding
Moreover, in this randomised group, participants who prescribed antibiotics immediately were not in a better condition than baseline symptoms in the randomised group and, therefore, had a higher risk of confounders.	Control
We failed to adjust for the possible confounders of the randomised group as baseline symptoms were not different between the randomised group and the prescribed antibiotics immediately, but those with severe symptoms were prescribed antibiotics immediately.	Blinding
Participants in the randomised group were prescribed antibiotics immediately after illness, which could be potentially confounded by baseline symptoms and prescription duration.	Blinding
In the randomised group, patients were prescribed antibiotics immediately when they had baseline symptoms, which can be a potential confounder.	Randomization
In the randomised group, patients were prescribed antibiotics immediately after the first episode of severe symptoms and were not given a baseline to treat these symptoms.	MissingData
We did not measure baseline symptoms, but we prescribing antibiotics immediately for severe symptoms in the randomised group did not remove any potential confounders.	Control
Cluster randomization with 2 clinics resulted in marginal differences and therefore, no full pragmatic trial was conducted.	Blinding
Cluster randomization in the clinics resulted in marginal differences, thereby identifying potential barriers to a full pragmatic trial.	Blinding
Cluster randomization of patients with marginal differences between clinics resulted in a full pragmatic trial, but it is not clear how identifying potential barriers to a full pragmatic trial might contribute to the outcome of the cluster randomization.	Generalization
Cluster randomization of patients into clinics resulted in marginal differences between patients with similar characteristics and it is possible that identifying potential barriers to a full pragmatic trial would have led to a less robust outcome analysis.	Randomization
Cluster randomization of patients within clinics resulted in marginal differences in treatment, and identifying potential barriers to a full pragmatic trial.	Control
Cluster randomization in the clinics resulted in marginal differences, which may not have been important in identifying potential barriers to a full pragmatic trial.	Randomization
Cluster randomization at n=4 clinics resulted in marginal differences within the first and second clusters of participants and it was not easy to determine if this, combined with the other study design, is an appropriate method for conducting a full pragmatic trial, e.g., cluster randomization or stratification of the patients by clinic results.	StudyDesign
Cluster randomization and clinics resulted in marginal differences, so identifying potential barriers to a full pragmatic trial was not an option.	Control
Cluster randomization in our clinics resulted in marginal differences in our patient outcome, which should have been investigated prior to the full pragmatic trial.	MissingData
Cluster randomization resulted in marginal differences in treatment for each clinic, which may have caused a delay in identifying potential barriers to a full pragmatic trial.	Blinding
In this case, it was an isolated occurrence for the study nurse to accidentally unblind the patient.	Blinding
This was an isolated occurrence in which a study nurse accidentally unblinded a patient.	Blinding
This is an isolated occurrence where a patient is accidentally unblinded by a study nurse.	Blinding
This was an isolated occurrence in which a patient was accidentally unblinded by a study nurse.	Blinding
The accidental unblinded patient was an isolated occurrence and was only found after the patient was blinded or when the study nurse reported the incident.	Blinding
In this isolated occurrence, the study nurse accidentally unblinded a patient with an unblinded number of study subjects.	Blinding
This was an isolated occurrence of a patient accidentally unblinded.	Blinding
This was an isolated occurrence in which the study nurse accidentally unblinded a patient.	Blinding
This was an isolated occurrence and was the patient’s only experience to be accidentally unblinded.	Blinding
This is an isolated occurrence where a patient accidentally unblinded a study nurse.	Blinding
Although lithium was shown to be beneficial, the 6 month trial duration could not exclude a long-term functional worsening caused by lithium.	Generalization
A 6 month trial duration could not exclude a beneficial effect of lithium on long-term functional worsening.	StudyDuration
The 6 month trial duration could exclude any beneficial effect of lithium in preventing or treating long-term functional worsening.	StudyDuration
Because a 6 month trial duration could exclude a beneficial effect of lithium on short-term functional worsening, it is difficult to exclude a beneficial effect of lithium.	StudyDuration
Since a 6-month trial duration could not exclude a beneficial effect of lithium on functional worsening, we can't exclude any association with a short-term functional worsening.	MissingData
As a result, the study design was adjusted for a 6-month trial duration which may exclude a beneficial effect of lithium and long-term functional worsening.	StudyDuration
Thus, 6 month trial duration could not exclude a beneficial effect of lithium on short-term functional worsening.	MissingData
The 6 month trial duration could not exclude a beneficial effect of lithium on long-term functional worsening.	MissingData
Furthermore, the 6 month trial duration could have excluded the beneficial effect of lithium on long-term functional worsening.	StudyDuration
Although we cannot exclude the beneficial effect of lithium on long-term functional worsening, our 6 month trial duration could have been longer.	StudyDuration
In addition, it is desirable to extend the scope of future research by implementing an extended follow-up.	Generalization
In addition, an extended follow-up will be desirable for future research.	Generalization
In addition, extended follow-up would be desirable for future research, particularly since it is more comprehensive and comprehensive.	MissingData
In addition, an extended follow-up is desirable in future research.	Generalization
In addition, extended follow-up would be desirable for future research.	MissingData
In addition, it would be desirable in future research to have an extended follow-up period and to conduct more comprehensive and comprehensive study.	Control
In addition, it is desirable for future research to have a comprehensive and extended follow-up.	Generalization
In addition, a more comprehensive and comprehensive follow-up time for future research is desirable.	StudyDuration
In addition, it would be desirable for future research to have an extended follow-up period.	Control
In addition, an extended follow-up period for future research may be desirable to be comprehensive and comprehensive.	Generalization
Thirdly, the two McGrath VLs have different features associated with the stylet (like their own characteristics and appearance, while the MacGrath VL has a similar appearance) and have different results concerning stylet use.	MissingData
Thirdly, we had different features associated with each indirect VL, e.g. different features associated with the McGrath VL, resulting in different results concerning stylet use.	MissingData
Secondly, McGrath VLs had different features associated with different stylet use.	MissingData
Thirdly, we used only one McCrath VL, therefore we have different features associated with stylet use in indirect vls, but we can see different results concerning stylet use in both McGrath and HL-V.	MissingData
Secondarily, different features associated with the McGrath VL were found in each vl and different results concerning stylet use were obtained for these indirect VLS.	MissingData
Therefore, secondly, different features associated with the McGrath VL and indirect vls can have different results concerning stylet use.	Blinding
Thirdly, different features associated with the McGrath VL were also present in indirect vls.	Control
Thirdly, because we did not use an indirect VL as the MCCrath VL, we could have different results concerning stylet use because the MCCrath VL has different features associated with stylets.	Generalization
Thirdly, different features associated with indirect vls such as the McNamara vl may lead to different results concerning stylet use in the different McGrath VLS.	MissingData
Thirdly, different features associated with MCGrath and indirect vls may have led to different results concerning stylet use in each VL.	Control
The results might not be completely extrapolated as we were only experienced anesthesiologists using the McGrath VL.	Generalization
Because our experiment was not performed in a clinical setting, we could not completely extrapolate our results to experienced anesthesiologists using the McGrath VM.	MissingData
Because we performed a study with a McGrath VL, we cannot completely extrapolate our results because we were not experienced anesthesiologists using the McGrath VL.	Control
The results might have been performed by experienced anesthesiologists using the McGrath VL, so it would have been more difficult to completely extrapolate to other subjects.	Control
Since we only had experienced anesthesiologists using the McGrath VL, our results might not be completely extrapolated.	MissingData
Because we did not perform an M.G.V.S. in this study, we could not completely extrapolate our results from experience anesthesiologists using M.G.V.S. and the McGrath VL.	Generalization
The results might have been due to the fact that we were not experienced anesthesiologists using the McGrath VL, so we could not completely extrapolate from their experiences.	MissingData
The McGrath VL is an important technique in the management of bowel disorders. Therefore, we cannot completely extrapolate these results to experienced anesthesiologists using this technique.	StudyDuration
Given the lack of experience with the McGrath VL, our results might not be completely extrapolated to experienced anesthesiologists using this technique.	Control
Because we did not perform anesthesia, the results might not completely extrapolate to experienced anesthesiologists using the McGrath VL.	MissingData
Due to the large number of dental practices randomized, there was a clear imbalance in patient characteristics between the two groups.	Blinding
Given the small number of dental practices randomized, there is a clear imbalance in patient characteristics between the two groups.	Blinding
Due to the large number of dental practices randomized, there was a clear imbalance in patient characteristics between the two groups.	MissingData
Due to the large number of dental practices randomized, there was a clear imbalance between the two groups in patient characteristics and compared with the large number of dental practices randomized.	MissingData
Due to the large number of dental practices randomized to this study, it is clear imbalance in the treatment groups between the two groups.	Control
Due to the large number of dental practices randomized, it was clear imbalance in the patient characteristics between the two groups.	MissingData
Despite the large number of dental practices randomized, a clear imbalance was apparent between the two groups in patient characteristics.	MissingData
Given the large number of dental practices randomized to two groups, there is a clear imbalance between the two groups regarding patient characteristics.	MissingData
Because of the small number of dental practices randomized into the two groups, there is a clear imbalance in patient characteristics between the two groups.	MissingData
Moreover, because of the large number of dental practices randomized in the two groups, a clear imbalance was evident in patient characteristics between the two groups.	Blinding
Finally, statistical tests were conducted to address alpha inflation, a potential concern.	StudyDuration
Finally, we conducted statistical tests on alpha inflation, which are a potential concern in the case of alpha inflation.	Randomization
Finally, we conducted statistical tests to look at alpha inflation and whether it is a potential concern.	Generalization
Finally, statistical tests on alpha inflation did not give the potential concern of false positives in a large sample of patients, which is a key determinant for a negative result.	MissingData
Finally, since we conducted statistical tests for alpha inflation, it is worth considering this potential concern.	Control
Finally, we conducted statistical tests to understand the potential concern with alpha inflation.	MissingData
Finally, we conducted statistical tests on alpha inflation as a potential concern.	Blinding
Finally, we conducted statistical tests to identify alpha inflation as a potential concern.	MissingData
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed their allocation at the end of blinding or if patient unblinding was possible.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed whether they were allocated blinded in the study and do not estimate whether patients guessed blinded or unblinded.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed when they were allocated the number of blinds, which may help to estimate patient unblinding.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed their allocation after patient unblinding, but we could estimate their allocation based on the percentage that patients guess.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed their allocation, so it is difficult to estimate this parameter.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed the patient unblinding at random, but estimated this value.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed which patients were allocated to each of the eight hospitals.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed which treatment they would be allocated or whether patients guessed the treatment that would be given in the next visit.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed their allocation at the time of patient unblinding, and did not measure whether patients guessed their allocation until after patient unblinding.	Blinding
In addition, we did not measure whether patients guessed the number of patients allocated to each of the 9 sites and did not measure whether patients guessed at patient unblinding.	Blinding
Our analyses assume that peer support, reminiscence and the other potentiates peer support.	Randomization
All analyses assume that peer support and reminiscence interact with peer support, and that this interacts with reminiscence.	Blinding
All analyses assume that one potentiates the other.	Control
Because peer support and reminiscence interact, our analyses assume that one potentiates the other.	MissingData
Because peer support and reminiscence interact, analyses assume that one potentiates the other.	MissingData
AssumedMost analyses assume that peer support and reminiscence interact and one potentiates the other.	MissingData
The analyses assume that peer support and reminiscence interact, so one potentiates the other.	Control
Because peer support and reminiscence do not interact, the one potentiates the other.	Randomization
Although these analyses assume that peer support and reminiscence interact, the one potentiates reminiscence.	MissingData
AssumedRisk AssumedRisk is mediated by peer support, and the one potentiates the other.	Blinding
An examination of hemoglobin drops (sugar drops) was not performed to assess potential small intestinal injury in patients with gastric erosions noted in a previously published study.	Generalization
No examination of gastric erosions noted (despite hemoglobin drops of over 43%), nor were hemoglobin drops of over 85% performed to assess potential small intestinal injury.	Generalization
No examination was performed to assess potential small intestinal injury, but hemoglobin drops were noted after examination of gastric erosions noted before the gastrectomy.	Control
Examination was not performed on patients with hemoglobin drops and gastric erosions noted (Table 3). However, we were unable to assess potential small intestinal injury (gastric erosions noted) because of the low hemoglobin levels.	MissingData
A blood examination was not performed to assess potential small intestinal injury, but hemoglobin drops were observed in one patient and gastric erosions noted in another.	MissingData
Although hemoglobin drops were not performed for examination, gastric erosions noted were common in patients with hemoglobin drops and have been associated with hemoglobin drops.	MissingData
The examination was not performed to assess potential small intestinal injury because hemoglobin drops were not seen on gastric erosions noted.	MissingData
A hemoglobin drop test was performed for gastric erosions noted but did not assess potential small intestinal injury.	MissingData
No examination was performed to assess potential small intestinal injury, although gastric erosions noted after hemoglobin drops were present.	MissingData
Although hemoglobin drops were not performed, gastric erosions noted were quite common, and we did not examine for hemoglobin drops to assess potential small intestinal injury.	MissingData
In this study, the relatively high number of participants who were unable to tolerate actigraphy either unable or unwilling to use actigraphy equipment failed.	MissingData
During the study, the majority of participants were unable to tolerate actigraphy and actigraphy equipment failed.	MissingData
Due to the relatively high number of participants that were unable or unwilling to tolerate actigraphy, our actigraphy equipment failed or we could not access an adequate supply of reagents and supplies.	Control
Weakness The relatively high number of participants able to tolerate actigraphy, while the actigraphy equipment failed to function or the actigraphy equipment failed.	Randomization
Due to the relatively high number of participants unable to tolerate actigraphy, actigraphy equipment failed in the majority of cases.	Control
Despite the relatively high number of participants who were unable or unwilling to tolerate actigraphy, the majority of participants were either unable or unwilling to use actigraphy equipment failed.	MissingData
However, because of the relatively high number of participants, either unable or unwilling to tolerate actigraphy, actigraphy equipment failed to be used.	MissingData
Due to the relatively high number of participants who tolerated actigraphy, either unable or unwilling to use the actigraphy equipment failed to tolerate actigraphy.	Blinding
We could not control for the relatively high number of participants unable to tolerate actigraphy or actigraphy equipment failed to work.	StudyDuration
Similarly, a relatively high number of participants who tolerated actigraphy or who were either unable to tolerate actigraphy or unable to tolerate actigraphy were either unable to tolerate actigraphy.	MissingData
